 
Konnichiwa.
Today we're going to talk about the second most important element in learning Japanese,
and that is vocabulary.
And we're going to talk about a number of things including how we can use the concept
of input and output to make our vocabulary learning much faster and more efficient.
Vocabulary is the biggest single learning element in learning Japanese or any language,
but particularly Japanese because unlike languages related to our own
we don't have a large proportion of the vocabulary closely related
to equivalent vocabulary in our own language.
This makes it an even bigger task.
But we can cut down that task considerably if we take a rational organic approach to it.
The conventional approach to learning vocabulary,
which actually works somewhat better with related languages than it does with unrelated languages,
although I don't think it's a wonderful strategy at any time,
really misrepresents the process that happens when we learn vocabulary.
It does this because it misunderstands what it really means to learn a word.
I recently wrote a post on Patreon called
"Why Japanese-to-English dictionaries are full of baloney".
Now, that was a somewhat provocative title and perhaps a bit unfair
because dictionaries only do what they're supposed to do,
which is give brief definitions of Japanese words in English.
They're not supposed to be writing 12-page essays on words.
The problem is that in most cases Japanese words don't actually correspond directly to English words.
In the case of very simple nouns they do:
tree, water, house, pencil, hand, foot, correspond pretty much exactly.
Well, as a matter of fact "foot" doesn't.
There isn't a word in Japanese that corresponds exactly to the English word "foot".
But most of the time these simple nouns have exact equivalents.
As soon as we get into anything even a little bit abstract, exact correspondences become pretty rare.
Even the words "up" and "down" don't correspond to any words in Japanese.
"Up" and "down" are prepositions, and there are no prepositions in Japanese.
"Ue" and "shita" are nouns and they work differently from "up" and "down" in English.
Now, once we get into subtler areas like, say, the word "interesting",
we encounter a phenomenon which we're going to find in the majority of Japanese words.
And that is that words in any language cover a particular area of the meaning spectrum.
And it's relatively rare for a Japanese word
to cover the exact same area of the meaning spectrum as an English word.
Now, this shouldn't be a cause for panic, because in fact it's going to work in our favor.
But first of all let me explain what I mean.
Let's take the word "omoshiroi", which is usually defined as "interesting".
Now, the truth is that the word "interesting" and the word "omoshiroi"
don't cover the same area of the meaning spectrum.
On one end, "omoshiroi" shades into areas of the meaning spectrum that
in English are covered by "amusing" and words of that sort.
On the other side, the word "interesting" shades into areas that are covered
not by the Japanese word "omoshiroi" but by the Japanese word "kyoumibukai".
And even this is oversimplifying the matter a little.
So, the idea that words can be translated,
that they have exact equivalents in other languages, is something of a myth,
especially when we're talking about unrelated languages like Japanese.
Now, one of my Patrons said that he found this very discouraging
because he was spending a lot of time learning words
and then here was I saying that what he was learning wasn't true anyway.
And I can see why that would be discouraging,
but the important thing here is that we really have to get rid of the whole conventional idea of learning words
and replace it with a different and more effective model.
So what do I mean by this?
Well, the idea of learning words in the conventional model is treated as a fact.
Such as, a square is a figure with four sides and four corners and the sides are of equal length.
A triangle is a figure with three sides and three corners,
and in an equilateral triangle the sides are of equal length.
These are straightforward pieces of information that you can just learn.
Words are not like this.
Words are more like people.
If you're introduced to a person, you'll learn her name and you may learn a couple of other things
like what her occupation is and where she comes from.
Would you say that you then know that person?
I don't think you would.
It's only when you've met her on several occasions under different circumstances
and had conversations with her that you start to say that you know her.
And the same is true of words.
What you get in a dictionary or a word list or even in sample sentences is just an introduction to the word.
We don't know the full range of its personality.
We can't learn words from dictionaries.
We can't learn words from Anki.
We can only learn words from meeting them again and again in real Japanese.
And that's one of the reasons why the only way you can actually learn Japanese
as opposed to learning *about* Japanese is by immersion.
And specifically in this case by what we can call "massive input" --
by getting a lot ofJapanese passing through your mind.
Now, this fact that words don't have exact correspondences, exact definitions for the most part
is what troubled my Patron.
We were actually talking about the word "motsu",
which we're often taught means "hold or have", and that's really quite true.
And what I was discussing was someone who used an expression like "heya-ni-wa gēmu-wo motsu",
which was intended to mean "I have games in my room".
This, unfortunately, isn't natural Japanese, because the word "motsu" fundamentally means "hold"
and by extension it can mean "have".
So if you say "pen-wo motsu", you could mean you're holding a pen
but you could by extension just mean that you have a pen.
You might have it in your pocket.
However, saying "heya-ni motsu", "I have in my room", is stretching the link to the English word "have" too far,
because we've moved too far away from the original "hold" meaning of "motsu"
into possessing something in a place other than the place where one is,
which does really stretch the word too far.
Now, this is what my Patron was worrying about:
"So, I learn a word like 'motsu' and then I find actually it can't be used in this or that circumstance,
and this is true of lots and lots of words."
So why isn't this worrying?
Well, this is where we get to the question of input and output.
As I say, I don't really like these words too much, so what I would prefer to say,
which boils down to the same thing, is "passive and active vocabulary".
In language, words always enter our passive vocabulary before they enter our active vocabulary.
That's to say, before we get to the stage where we can use them well in so-called "output"
-- speak them and write them --
we have a stage where we understand them when we hear them,
but we can't necessarily use them very accurately.
We all see small children going through this phase
and foreign speakers of languages go through it as well.
It's not anything to worry about.
The only problem is that when we have this concept of "learning a word",
which is supposed to include the full range of the use of that word, we start to worry:
we've learned "motsu", but we can't use it under all circumstances.
That isn't a problem at all, that's just natural.
How does this work in our favor?
Well, once we jettison the conventional notion of learning words,
we can comfortably settle into the idea that when we put words in our Anki, our SRS, or whatever,
we're not trying to learn the word.
We're just trying to pin it in place.
So it doesn't matter if the definition is just one other word.
And preferably, if we know one, a Japanese other word.
But the point is that whatever that definition is, whether it's a quick, short Japanese sentence,
another Japanese word, an English word, it doesn't really matter, because that's not where we're learning it.
That's just a tacking stitch where we pin it in place.
Where we learn it is the same place where we get to know a person, that is to say,
in multiple encounters, in context, in understanding what a word really is and how it really works in Japanese
as opposed to how the supposed equivalents work in English.
This takes a massive burden off the learning of words.
We're not trying to learn them to active vocabulary level.
We're only trying to learn them to passive vocabulary level.
This means that an introduction, a hint, is all we need.
In our Anki we shouldn't have long definitions on the back of our cards.
We should have the briefest definitions we can get away with.
We shouldn't be trying to memorize all kinds of things about the word.
We should be simply pinning it in place and letting our immersion do the rest.
Now, of course, sometimes one needs to use words in output, that's to say, use them actively.
Now, if you need to use new words that you only just learned in output
and sometimes that happens particularly in writing --
I do have a technique for that which can help you enormously
and save you from using strange Eihongo (that's to say, English-structured Japanese).
However, that's for another video.
And I'd like to add a point that I've made elsewhere,
which is that I'm not suggesting that you avoid active use of Japanese so-called "output" for a long time.
On the contrary, you should use Japanese actively whenever you get the opportunity to do so.
Sometimes you'll use words wrongly just as children sometimes use words wrongly
and foreigners in any language sometimes use words wrongly.
If your partner is a conversation-partner or a tutor, she may correct you or she may not. It doesn't matter.
A good conversation-tutor knows that over-correcting is not a good idea.
The important thing is to keep up the flow of communication.
That's the way you get the feel of Japanese.
The "komakai" bits, the small stuff, the exact meanings, etc --
that will come to you over time if you're immersing in Japanese.
And if you're not immersing in Japanese, why are you worried about it anyway?
So the fact that a word doesn't correspond exactly to its English equivalent is no cause for worry.
And if you are worrying about it, the chances are that what you are doing in fact is over-learning words.
You don't need to do anything more than pin words in place so long as you're immersing in Japanese.
And since that's the only way to actually learn words rather than just learn *about* words,
if you aren't immersing in Japanese, you're not going to learn them anyway.
If you have any questions or comments,
please put them in the Comments below
and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my dear Gold Kokeshi patrons, who make these videos possible,
and all my dear patrons and supporters on Patreon and everywhere.
It's you who allow this revolution to happen.
Thank you.
And I'd like to thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.