Konnichiwa.
Today we're going to talk about keys to kanji pronunciation.
Now, the biggest single key to kanji pronunciation is a hack that I taught a while back,
which is the Sound Sisters.
For a relatively small investment of time, this is going to give you the pronunciations
of hundreds of kanji and thousands of words.
So I'm going to put a link to that above my head and in the information section below.
If you haven't encountered the Sound Sisters yet, you really should do so.
However, there are some other things happening with the pronunciation of kanji
which are very helpful to know in addition to the Sound Sisters.
Now, if you know my work, I'm sure you know that I won't ask you to and
I don't want you to start trying to learn readings of kanji in the abstract.
We learn how kanji are pronounced from learning words.
But understanding the sounds that can be used and the ways in which they can occasionally change
helps us to remember and understand how words are pronounced.
A question that I often get asked, particularly by people who have done all or some of the Heisig Method,
so they actually know a lot of kanji but they have no idea at all how they're pronounced,
is: "When I see a two- or three- or more kanji word and I get the furigana so I know what the pronunciation is,
how do I know which kana belong to which kanji?"
Now, if you're learning kanji organically, the way I recommend learning kanji organically,
and I'll put a link above my head and in the information section below,
you won't have this problem nearly so much as someone who's front-loaded with Heisig and English keywords.
However, it's still worth understanding the principles here.
The first thing to understand is that when we're talking about the on-readings
-- that's the Chinese readings of kanji --
these are the readings you're going to see most of the time
in words of more than one kanji which have no okurigana --
that's to say, they don't have any following kana that are part of the word.
And some textbooks, the more informative ones, will tell you that generally speaking
in words with no okurigana we get on-readings not kun-readings, that's to say, Chinese not Japanese readings.
And it's a bit of a hit-or-miss way of describing it, and the reason they put it that way is
because of the very strange model of the Japanese language that they have,
which is full of things like "na-adjectives" and "adverbs".
As you know if you've watched my videos, nearly all Japanese words fall into one of three types.
They are either verbs or adjectives or, if they're not verbs or adjectives,
they're nearly always nouns.
Of course, this gets obscured if you start calling adjectival nouns "na-adjectives" or
adverbial nouns "adverbs".
Anything with two kanji and no kana is a noun.
All verbs and all adjectives always have kana as well as kanji, because at the very least
they must have an い on the end, not part of the kanji,
or anう-row kana on the end, not part of the kanji.
So, if we are dealing with an all-kanji word, with very, very few exceptions,
that word is a noun.
And these multiple-kanji nouns are almost all originally Chinese,
and that means that each of the kanji will have its on-reading.
Now, this is a huge section of Japanese vocabulary, and the thing we need to understand
if we're ever asking questions like "Which kanji belong to which kana?"
is that just about all on-readings consist of either one or two mora.
Now, a mora is a unit of pronunciation in Japanese.
Most of the time it's equivalent to a single kana.
So ka, ki, ku, ke, ko, na, ni, nu, ne, no -- each of those is one mora.
And an on-reading is going to be one mora or two.
So a two-kanji Chinese-based noun (which is most two-kanji nouns) can have a maximum of  four mora.
Now, sometimes we're going to see them with up to six characters. Why is that?
The reason for that is that the small versions  of や、ゆ、and よ、
which join to the kana before them, fuse together with it to form a single mora.
So sounds like "ryu", "nya" etc. -- these are single mora.
So when you see a kana with a small や、ゆ、or よ after it, that is a single kana sound.
So once we understand that, we can understand that the on-reading of any kanji
is going to be either one or two single kana sounds.
Now, we become able to make sense of all this and have a good chance to predict
what's going to happen in any given on-reading once we understand the real reason behind this law
that an on-reading can only have one or two kana sounds.
The reason is that in Chinese one hanzi, which is what became kanji in Japanese,
can only represent a single syllable.
So why can it represent either one or two kana sounds?
Well, fortunately for us, for our limited practical purposes here, we can say that Chinese
is the same as English in the way that it defines syllables.
So, for example, in English we can have the words "shack" or "hack" or "mitts" or "hats",
and all of those are a single syllable.
But in Japanese, because you can't have a consonant without an attached vowel after it,
they all have to be two mora: "shaku", "haku", "hatsu", "mitsu".
And these are all actual on-readings in Japanese.
One syllable in Chinese, two mora in Japanese.
And there are two other ways in which this happens.
For example, the on-reading of "umi" (sea) is "kai",
so the word for a pirate is "kaizoku" (sea-robber).
Now this again is two kana-sounds in Japanese, isn't it? "Ka" and "i".
So why is that?
Well, just as in English, if we take the word "I", a one-letter word and the most important word
in the English language, particularly American English, this is what's called a diphthong,
which is what happens when two vowel sounds are smashed together to make one syllable.
Now, what do I mean by two vowel sounds?
Well, if you try to take a long time singing the word "I", you'll find that at some point
you have to change from the first vowel sound to the second: "Ahh--eee".
Try it yourself.
You can't do it without changing unless you come from Texas or Alabama.
So, while in English and Chinese sounds like "I" together with any attached consonant, like "kai or "tai",
count as one syllable, in Japanese, it's two kana sounds.
And once again, in a word like "jouhou" (information or report),
each of the kanji is two kana sounds:  jo-u, ho-u.
Why is that? Well, again, Chinese and English are the same here.
If you say a word like "showboat", both of those are long vowels.
It's not "shobot", it's "showboat".
In English that doesn't make any difference, and it's the same in Chinese.
Even a long vowel is still one syllable.
But in Japanese vowels are all of equal length and if you want to double them it becomes another mora.
So those are the three circumstances under which an on-reading can be two kana sounds instead of one.
Now, this doesn't of course apply to kun-readings.
Because, for example, the kun-reading of "kai" is "umi" (sea) and that really is two syllables
in any language: "u" and "mi".
Because it's broken by a consonant in the middle, it can't be less than two syllables in any language.
But that's okay, because it's a kun-reading.
It's a native Japanese word that's simply been superimposed over a kanji.
It's not a two-kanji noun in which each kanji has its originally Chinese on-reading.
And in those relatively few words which are verbs or adjectives with two kanji,
these will always be kun-readings
and it doesn't make any sense to ask what the reading of each kanji is.
So, for example, "oishii", which has two kanji:
there's no point asking which kanji is the "o" and which kanji is the "i". It doesn't work like that.
A native Japanese word has been superimposed over two Chinese characters that mean "beautiful taste".
And that's what a kun-reading is.
If you take off the "shii" and turn it into a noun, then the pronunciation is "bimi",
which is the on-reading of the first and second kanji.
Now, let's put this into practice.
Let's take a word like "choumiryou", which means "seasoning" or "flavoring":
the first kanji sound is "cho"; the second is "u"; the third is "mi".
Now, we know that "u" and "mi" can't belong together as on-readings because
"umi" would make two syllables in English or Chinese or any language.
"Umi" is of course a kun-reading meaning "sea",
but nothing split up with a consonant in the middle can be an on-reading.
Words like "ishi", "oto", "kata", "hana" etc,
all of which are kun-readings of single kanji, can't be on-readings.
Therefore we know how to break up this word.
"Chou" has to belong together; "mi" has to be on its own --
"miryo" also won't make an on-reading because it's broken by a consonantal sound, "ry" --
so the only way to break it up is "chou-mi-ryou".
And applying these principles you're nearly always going to know which on-readings belong to which kanji.
Now, once we understand this, we can start to talk about
the sound changes that sometimes take place within these on-readings.
There are two main ones and neither of them happen all the time,
both of them happen most of the time, and they are completely regular.
So if they happen we know exactly what they're going to be like.
And also, the next thing we know is that they only happen in certain circumstances.
And if we have learned about counters, which I taught in a recent lesson (and I'll put a link above my head),
we already know pretty much what the circumstances are and how they're going to work.
These sound changes only affect words in which the first kana of the second kanji can take a ten-ten.
So that means kana from the ka, sa, ta, and ha columns.
Those are the only kanji that can take ten-ten.
Now, they're not going to take a ten-ten, but the simplest and most straightforward
way of identifying the ones that can change is "the ones that can take a ten-ten".
If it can't take a ten-ten, the change isn't going to happen.
So the first change is what Alice calls, in my book "Alice in Kanji Land", "small-tsu hooking".
And what this means is that when we have two kanji and the first one ends in either つ or ち
and the second one can take a ten-ten but doesn't have one, the つ or the ち turns into a small つ.
And that's all, except for the ha column.
So, for example, with moonlight, whose on-readings are "getsu" (moon) and "kou" (light),
but we don't say "getsu-kou", we say "ge'kkou", because "getsu" ends in a つ and
"ko" is a kana that can take a ten-ten -- it can become "go".
We're not giving it the ten-ten, but we are making this transformation,
so "getsu" plus "kou" becomes "ge'kkou".
The same with "sunlight": "nichi", which is "sun", plus "kou" doesn't become "nichi-kou" but "ni'kkou".
So this is exactly the same as what happens in counters with "ichi", for example.
We don't say "ichisatsu" (one volume), we say "i'ssatsu";
we don't say "ichikai" (one story in a house), we say "i'kkai".
So it's exactly the same transformation that's happening here when the first kanji has two kana
and the second kana is either つ or ち.
It doesn't happen all the time, it does happen most of the time,
and the transformation is the same every time.
Either it happens that way or it doesn't happen.
And if the first kana of the second kanji can't take a ten-ten, then it isn't going to happen.
If the first kana of the second kanji is from the ha-hi-hu-he-ho row, just as with "ichi",
it takes a maru to become pa-pi-pu-pe-po.
So, just as "ichi-hiki" becomes "ippiki",
so "shutsu" plus "hatsu", which is "the departure (of a vehicle or something)"
becomes not "shutsu-hatsu" but "shuppatsu";
"shippai" (a mistake), made up of "shitsu" and "hai", is not "shitsu-hai", it's "shippai";
"an announcement", "hatsu" plus "hyou", is not "hatsu-hyou" but "happyou" (announcement).
Now, the other main set of changes that takes place between on-readings is when
the second kana of the first kanji is ン and the second one begins with a kana from the ha-hi-hu-he-ho column,
just that one, the ha-hi-hu-he-ho column, then normally it takes a maru to become pa-pi-pu-pe-po.
And we're all familiar with this happening, for example, in "sempai",
which is "sen" plus "hai", which becomes not "sen-hai" but "sempai".
"Shimpi" (mysterious), which consists of "shin" and "hi" (the "hi" of "himitsu") becomes not "shin-hi" but "shimpi";
"kampeki" (perfect), which is made up of "kan" plus "heki" becomes not "kan-heki" but "kampeki".
And actually these words like "kan-heki" and "sen-hai" are quite difficult to say if you try saying them,
so I think that's probably the main reason for this change.
One more change that's worth noticing, and this doesn't affect just on-readings, in fact
it affects kun-readings more often than it affects on-readings, although it can affect both,
is that where we have two nouns both of which can stand alone that are joined together
to make a compound noun, if the first kanji of the second noun can take a ten-ten,
in this case it does.
We're still dealing with those same four columns.
They're the ones that change all the time: ka, sa, ta, and ha.
But this time they actually take that ten-ten.
So, for example, "bookshelf", "hondana": "hon" (book) and "tana" (shelf), both can stand alone as nouns,
but when they're put together into a compound noun, they become not "hon-tana" but "hondana".
When we put together "arm" and "clock" -- "arm" is "ude", "clock" is "tokei" --
we get not "ude-tokei" but "udedokei", which is a wristwatch, literally an "arm-clock".
When we get "gomi", which is "trash", and "hako", which is "box", when we put them together
we make not "gomi-hako" but "gomibako", which in Japanese is how we say a "trash can".
And when we use the same word twice to imply multiplicity, we say things like, for example,
"hitobito", not "hito-hito", so that second "hito" gets a ten-ten.
Or again, "gods": a "god" is "kami" and when we talk about gods in the plural
we sometimes say "kamigami", not "kami-kami", because that second "kami" takes the ten-ten.
And obviously this only happens where a ten-ten can be applied.
And an important side-note here is that ten-ten hooking will never happen when
there's a ten-ten anywhere else in the second word.
Even if the second word is more than one kanji long, if there's a ten-ten anywhere in that word,
ten-ten hooking isn't going to happen.
The other time it doesn't happen is where it causes ambiguity with another reasonably common word.
Now, if we understand these basic principles,
we get a much clearer idea of how a given word is likely to be pronounced.
And, as we see, there are certain sound changes that take place regularly in Japanese and
they almost always affect the same group of kana, the ones that can take a ten-ten.
So, once we realize that and we realize what those regular sound-shifts are,
we're not faced with lots and lots of random exceptions.
We understand that there are certain simple processes
that happen under certain very clearly defined conditions.
The only problem is that they don't happen all the time, but all of these take place
when the conditions are met more often than not, most of the time.
And when they don't, they simply revert to not being changed.
They're not different in different circumstances, they're regular.
They either take place or they don't.
If you have any questions or comments,
please put them in the Comments below and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons, my producer-angels, who make these videos possible,
and all my patrons, who are all angels, from the Pink Kokeshi right up to the Gold ones.
I love all of you.
And I'd like to thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.