Konnichiwa. Today we're going to talk about
something that several people have asked 
me to clarify, and that is the noun "teki". 
Now, this is a noun but its main function, 
when it's pronounced "teki", 
is to be added to other nouns. So it
works essentially like a suffix. 
Once it's been added, the whole entity 
essentially becomes an adjectival noun,
so it can take "na" and "da". Now, this 
can be confusing, 
partly because of the way the English 
dictionaries express it, 
although it's probably the only way they  
could express it without going into much 
more detail. They say that it means the  
 English suffixes -ical, -ive, -al, -ic, -y etc. 
It also says that it means things like
"in terms of, for, from the viewpoint of,
from a x standpoint, as far as x is 
concerned", etc. 
So what does all this actually mean?
We seem to have a bit of a mess here in
a way, don't we? 
But in fact it's very straightforward. What 
"teki" does is one thing and one thing only. 
And that is, that it makes an adjectival 
noun out of a regular noun. 
But the important thing to understand 
here is that it properly only works
with abstract nouns, nouns that represent
ideas and abstractions
rather than, say, things or animals. Now, 
you will in some cases see it used with
non-abstract nouns in a loose way to mean 
 "-like" or "kind of", or something like that,
but these are colloquial uses and really 
once you get the real use you can 
understand how it can sometimes get 
used colloquially in ways that aren't
really strictly the way it should be used. 
So let's look at "teki" as it really is, 
as it properly works. First of all, 
the fact that it replaces so many English
suffixes is not a cause for confusion.
Rather the opposite. It shows the wonderful
lego-like structure of Japanese. 
English has all these strategies and 
quite a few more, 
because "teki" does things other than 
just replacing those suffixes, and
all these structures are essentially making
abstract concepts into adjectival nouns. 
Japanese has this one strategy for all of
them. So we don't have to remember
lots of different suffixes and we don't have
to remember the other stuff either.
All we have to know is how 'teki" actually 
works in Japanese. 
And the fact that it has this power means 
that it's making an awful lot of the abstract
adjectival terms in the language, which 
again is a blessing, because once
we know how it works we have the key to 
a whole range of relatively abstract vocabulary. 
So, for example, "science" is "kagaku", so  
the corresponding adjective, 
in English "scientific", is "kagakuteki". 
"History" is "rekishi", so the corresponding 
adjective, 
in English "historical", is "rekishiteki".
"Heredity" is "iden", so the corresponding 
 adjective,
in English "hereditary, is "identeki". 
And we also have words that do not follow 
this pattern in English. 
For example, "kandou" is "the state of 
being deeply moved emotionally",
and "kandouteki" is used of something 
that arouses that emotion in us.
So if we see a moving anime or a song
or something that moves us deeply 
we say that it's "kandouteki". 
So this is all very straightforward,
isn't it? So how do we get from this 
to this whole set of meanings like 
"of, for, from the viewpoint of, 
from a standpoint of x, as far as x is 
concerned" and all that sort of thing? 
Well, again the answer is very simple.
If we add to "teki" -ni or -ni-wa, we are
essentially turning our adjectival noun
into an adverb. We know that -ni does
that with adjectival nouns all the time.
So, "kagaku" (science) becomes
"kagakuteki" (scientific), and 
"kagakuteki-ni" gives us "scientifically".
So we can say "tenki-wa kagakuteki-ni 
yohou sareru" 
(the weather is forecast scientifically).
"Rekishi" (history) becomes "rekishiteki"
(historical). "Rekishiteki-ni" means "historically".
So, "kore-wa rekishiteki-ni kyoumibukai" 
(this is interesting historically). 
"Law" in Japanese is "houritsu", so 
"houritsuteki" means "legal",
and "houritsuteki-ni" means "legally". 
So we can say "subete-no ningen-wa 
houritsuteki-ni-wa taitou de aru" 
(all human beings are legally equal).
And this is a very flexible, very
versatile construction. It can be used 
in all kinds of cases. 
for example, one thing that one of the 
people who asked me about "teki"
talked about was "Well, I can't see how 
how 'teki' can be added to 'shourai'.
'Shourai' means 'future'. What does 
 'shouraiteki' mean?"
Well, we don't have any such word in 
English. "Futurish / futurishly", 
something like that, doesn't exist in 
English, but it can exist in Japanese 
because we don't have to have special 
words with special suffixes to do this. 
We can attach "teki" to any abstract
noun (within reason). 
So, when we attach "teki" to "shourai" 
we can say something like 
"shouraiteki-ni ryuugaku-wo kangaete iru". 
And the only way of translating this 
into English is to say  
"I'm thinking about studying abroad
in the future." 
But in Japanese what we're really 
saying is
"I'm thinking 'futurishly' about  
studying abroad". 
So it's important to look out for this 
kind of construction because
it doesn't have an English counterpart. 
But in fact it works exactly the same as
"rekishiteki-ni" or "houritsuteki-ni". 
It's less technical-sounding, but it works 
in exactly the same way.
If you have any "teki" usages that you 
find difficult,
please put them in the Comments below  
and we'll take a look at them. 
And if you have any other questions or 
comments, please put them in
the Comments below and I will answer
as usual. 
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons, 
my producer-angels, 
who make these videos possible, and all
my patrons and supporters on Patreon 
and everywhere, and all of you who like 
the videos, comment on the videos
or just watch the videos, especially you 
for attending this lesson right now. 
Thank you all for helping to make this 
possible,
for helping us to uncover the underlying 
logic of Japanese 
instead of looking at it all in terms of 
English equivalents, 
which tends to lead to considerable 
confusion in many cases. 
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.