Konnichiwa. Today we're going to talk about
something that you can do and that, once you've got it set up,
it's not going to take up very much of your time at all,
but if you're using Japanese regularly it's going to reinforce every day
the actual structures of Japanese, the actual sounds of Japanese,
and the way the whole language holds together,
in a way that is superior to that of many so-called Japanese experts.
So, what is this?
As you know, Japanese structure as taught by so-called
Japanese grammar websites and textbooks is highly misleading
and it's mostly misleading because it's based on treating Japanese
as if weren't Japanese but English or at least a European language.
This takes various forms, misrepresenting the particles, misrepresenting the parts of speech,
misrepresenting the verb-and-helper system, and all of it essentially based on Western thinking
and based on modeling Japanese as a Western language.
And a key element in this is modeling Japanese as if it were written in Roman characters.
Now, you may think that the link with Roman characters is a very beginner kind of problem.
We got over that in the first year, didn't we?
Well, as a matter of fact, this romaji link remains with us for a very long time
and causes enormous confusion and damage even in areas where you really wouldn't expect it.
Let me give you an example. If you go to Wikipedia
and look at the article on Japanese vowel verbs and consonant verbs.
Now this article really exists. It's absolutely serious.
It's written with a straight face by grownups with high school diplomas and doctorates too.
And these people are called experts in Japanese.
And what they're telling you is that there are two kinds of Japanese verbs
and more than half of all the verbs in the language are what they call "consonant verbs",
which means that their stems end in a consonant.
Now, if you know anything at all about the Japanese stem system, you know that this isn't possible.
The only way you can make anything end in a consonant in Japanese
(other than the quasi-consonant sound "n") is to cut a kana in half.
And this isn't just a question of the Japanese writing system;
it's a question of the way that Japanese sounds are conceived and produced by Japanese people.
The consonant element and the vowel element are seen as one entity,
so Japanese people conceive and pronounce them together.
And that is why we have what seem like apparent exceptions in the pronunciation
when looked at from a romaji perspective.
It's why we say "ta chi tsu te to" rather than "ta ti tu te to", which we would say
if we were conceiving the vowel and the consonant elements separately.
The lips are in position for the vowel element while making the consonant element.
So this is a fundamentally different way of looking at the sounds that people make.
But the people who talk about vowel verbs and consonant verbs are assuming
that romaji is the source code of human language, that it is the last word,
the absolute truth on what sounds humans make when they speak,
just as Western philosophy and the Western view of the world is the absolute truth
and everything else is some kind of foreign superstition.
And the arrogance of this would not be important if it just stayed
on the upper story of the Tower of Babel, the linguistic experts.
But it doesn't.
It filters down into Genki and every Japanese grammar (so-called) website you've ever seen
and makes the simple, logical, beautiful Japanese verb-stem system with its verb-stems
and its helper-verbs like -reru and -seru, helper-adjectives like -nai and -tai,
helper-nouns like -sou and -nagara, into a whole mess of strange rules
and peculiar exceptions and all sorts of odd things that you just have to learn.
Now, we don't need to worry about that because my structure course
helps you to understand all this as it really is.
But what it does show is that this romaji thinking is deeply lodged
in the minds of people who pass for Japanese experts.
And if it's deeply lodged in their minds,
it's really rather likely that it's going to be deeply lodged in our minds too,
even though we think we've left romaji far behind us.
And I've discovered this to be the truth with people that I've taught and worked with in the early days,
that that romaji link remains strong in the mind.
Now why would this be when we actually don't use romaji any more?
Well, the fact is that if we write Japanese on a computer
and usually on a smartphone or a tablet,
we are writing in romaji all the time,
because what we're doing is typing out the words in romaji
and letting the algorithm turn them into kana.
So we ourselves are still conceiving them as romaji entities.
And since we've been brought up on romaji from an early age,
this is reinforcing something that was all too likely to happen in any case.
Now, what can we do about this?
Well, what we can do is reverse the process.
If we type in kana, if we input in kana, then every time we do it we are reinforcing
the real structure of Japanese instead of the romaji approximations.
How easy is it to do that?
Well, on a smartphone or a tablet it's very, very easy indeed.
There's a simple and beautiful system called "flick input".
It looks like this.
It has the basic sounds keys: ka, sa, ta, etc. and when you press any one of them,
the other four possibilities pop up, so a has i, u, e, and o pop up around it;
ka has ki, ku, ke, and ko around it.
And you don't have to do this for very long -- you very, very quickly get used to
the idea of what direction you have to flick in to get what sound,
because it's a perfectly regular system.
And the three keys at the bottom handle the odd bits like adding ten-tens, small letters,
and the odd characters wo, wa and n as well as the long katakana dash.
So this is really very simple and you can make that switch right away.
Mobile devices usually have it built in and if it's not built in it's a very simple official download.
With computers it's a little bit more difficult.
Japanese computers have kana on the keyboard and your computer probably doesn't.
But there's a very surprisingly simple and cheap fix for this,
which is that you can get sets of keyboard stickers on eBay and other places --
and they're very cheap indeed.
They range from around $2 to around $6 for a set of keyboard stickers.
They come in two types.
You can get solid color ones, which would have the romaji and the kana on them,
and you can get transparent ones that just have the kana and let the romaji that was already there show through.
And if you have a lighted keyboard you're probably going to want one of the transparent kind.
You apply these and then you have a Japanese-style keyboard.
If you're a hunt-and-peck typist, it's really no problem at all.
You'll have to get used to where the kana keys are, but that doesn't take too long.
If you are a touch typist, you may be asking, "Well, is it Mavis Beacon all over again?"
Fortunately, it isn't.
What people find is that it's actually much quicker to pick up touch typing in kana
if you know romaji touch typing already. I'm not sure why this is.
It's probably that your fingers are more confident about finding things blind.
It obviously takes time, but you really don't need to do a lot of Mavis Beacon-style drills.
They do exist in Japanese, but you probably don't need them.
You just ease yourself into knowing where everything is.
And of course you can always peek if you need to at first.
Is it worth doing?
I would say, absolutely it is, because you're reinforcing the real structure of the language.
With mobile devices, Android or iOS, it's really very, very easy.
There's absolutely no excuse for not doing it.
With computers it's a little bit more tricky.
If Japanese isn't a huge part of your life you may not want to bother,
but I would certainly think about it.
It's one of the things you can do that takes a bit of setting up,
but once it's set up, it's in place.
I don't even need the stickers any more because I can just touch type in Japanese.
And it breaks the romaji link, which is something that stays with us
without our really being aware of it for a very long time,
probably for our entire lives, if we don't break it.
And it establishes in our mind the real kana structure of the language.
If you have any questions or comments,
please put them in the Comments below and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons, who make these videos possible,
and all my patrons and supporters on Patreon and everywhere,
because all of you make these videos possible.
And I think it's wonderful that we're able to have these freely available to anybody
because my supporters are generous enough to allow me to do that.
And I'd like to thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.