Konnichiwa.
Today we're going to talk about language acquisition
and in particular the input hypothesis of Professor Stephen Krashen.
You may not have heard of Professor Stephen Krashen, 
but an awful lot of what gets said on the Internet about 
acquiring Japanese comes indirectly from him.
A lot of people who promote various methods of learning Japanese on the Internet
misunderstand and misrepresent the work of Professor Krashen,
but I'm not going to talk about that.
I'm going to talk about that work itself
and how it relates to how we can acquire, rather than learn, Japanese.
Now, a lot of the people who misrepresent Professor Krashen
tend to present him as "the voice of science", and this is really not what he is.
He's had a very good influence on the learning of language
with his bringing to the fore of immersion  
rather than abstract study, and that's good.
He also puts forward a number of theories which are really very questionable
and have received a lot of criticism in the academic community
because his evidence for them is really pretty sketchy,
and I'll link to a paper below showing some academic assessments
of Professor Krashen's work in case you're interested in following that up.
When I looked at some of Professor Krashen's talks,
I was a little shocked by some of the things he says, because he uses arguments
and techniques which really are not worthy of a person of his standing.
For example, he opposes the idea that need or necessity
is an important driving force in language.
Now, I've often argued that it is.
It's partly because of the pressure of need and desire
to use English, the international language, which
makes so many foreign users of English so successful.
And it's the lack of that need and pressure and desire that means that
so few foreign learners of Japanese are in fact successful at learning Japanese.
Now, what I think is neither here nor there.
The point is that in arguing against this, Professor Krashen used
an extremely dishonest argument -- and you can look that up on Wikipedia.
He said that if you take someone up in a helicopter and tell them that
if they don't speak German, you'll throw them out, they have a huge pressure,
a huge desire, a huge need to speak German, but they still can't speak it.
Now, this is a completely dishonest strawman argument.
Nobody in their right mind, not even an academic, has ever, as far as I know,
suggested that you learn language from the need itself.
That would be completely irrational.
So what Professor Krashen is doing here is the classic strawman technique
of setting up a completely irrational argument that's easy to refute,
pretending that's what the other side is saying and refuting it,
and hoping that nobody notices the bait and switch.
Wikipedia didn't seem to.
Now, as I say, I'm not really wanting to criticize Professor Krashen 
across the board. He has had a very good influence.
It's really his tendency to put forward his ideas on language acquisition
as if they were a general theory of language acquisition, something like
the Einstein of language acquisition, that is rather unfortunate.
Perhaps he wouldn't have got as much attention or as much influence
if he hadn't presented it in that way, 
but that really doesn't stand up to much examination.
In its broadest sense, his theory is that 
we only acquire language from comprehensible input.
Not from abstract instruction or anything else.
From comprehensible input.
And in its broadest sense, that is true.
We don't acquire language from abstract learning.
We learn about language from that, and it may be very useful.
But we don't acquire language from abstract learning.
We don't acquire language from input that we can't comprehend.
Some people say, "Oh, just listen to it for long enough
and it'll soak in and you'll start to understand it."
For most people that isn't true, 
and I'm not really sure it's true for anyone.
Some people claim to have learned language that way,
but when you look into it there are often other factors involved.
It's not quite as true as they probably honestly believe it to be.
And the argument that we all did that as children
(not me, but all of you) doesn't hold water either.
And I've made a whole video on why it is that
what adults do when they learn language is nothing like
what children do when they learn to process
the world via the medium of language.
So up to this point we can agree with Professor Krashen, 
but where it starts to fall down is in his assertion 
that the part of our mind that acquires language,
what Professor Chomsky calls the "language-acquisition device",
is entirely separate from the means by which, say, we learn its structure.
Now, they are separate, and I've talked about this in other videos.
I'll link to one if you'd like to follow that up.
But they're not completely separate.
They're not cut off from each other by an iron wall.
And this is what Professor Krashen seems to imply when 
he says things like: instruction in the grammar of a language
does not help us with acquiring the language 
unless it's in the target language itself,
and even then it doesn't help us 
because it's instruction in the language.
It would help us just the same if it were about
the aerodynamics of a bumblebee.
Now, this assertion is completely unprovable and intuitively highly unlikely.
What seems to happen is that the language-acquisition device,
the part of our mind that acquires language
as opposed to learning about language, will use any tool 
at its disposal in the herculean attempt to comprehend language.
So if it has structures available to it, it will apply them.
And what will happen then is that those structures,
which started out as abstract learning
(if you follow my course, you're learning structure in the abstract),
those tools when applied over and over again by the language-acquisition device
in understanding comprehensible input, 
those tools pass from the conscious, abstract side of the mind 
into the unconscious, automatic part of the mind.
And this is part of the process of acquiring language,
passing anything we may have learned in an abstract manner, 
vocabulary, structure, kanji, anything,
into that area of the mind where we can recognize it instantly
without going through all the steps in our conscious mind.
This happens when we learn anything, like driving a car or typing,
but with language, which is much more complex,
we have a whole mechanism in the mind for doing this.
Professor Krashen says that rules are an external monitor:
they're not part of our understanding of the language,
they're just something we use to monitor whether things are correct or not.
Now, that idea may come partly from the terrible way 
in which language is generally taught, 
in which so-called grammar is fed to people 
as a set of arbitrary and meaningless rules
rather than clear lucid structures that help us 
to understand and grasp the language.
Part of the reason for this, of course, is that most languages
are not as logical and clear as Japanese is.
I don't think I could make the kind of precise, logical models
for most languages that I have made for Japanese.
So, part of that is not so much Professor Krashen's fault as the fault,
to some extent, of the language-teaching establishment 
and to some extent of non-Japanese languages.
Now, we all grasp the structures of languages over time,
whether they're clear and precise and easy to learn
or whether they're very complex and messy.
We grasp them, but we don't know we've grasped them. 
Most people speaking their native language can't tell you
why you can say this but you can't say that, 
why this sounds right and that doesn't. 
But they do know the underlying structures 
in a completely intuitive and non-abstract manner.
Now, you could say,
"Isn't this an argument for learning in a purely intuitive way,
the way first-language learners learned as children?"
And in the first place I'd say this isn't so easy for adult learners
for a number of reasons (which I've talked about in another video)
but more importantly than that, even if it is possible,
it's a very, very, very labor-intensive way of going about it.
We need to spend thousands and thousands and thousands of hours
to get to the point where we intuit structures to that depth.
And of course children do that.
They spend their whole life, practically, engaging with 
their native language and intuiting its structures.
Now, we can short-cut that by learning the structures themselves
and then applying them and allowing our unconscious mind,
our language-acquiring mind, to pass them into the unconscious stage,
just as we pass all kinds of activities to the unconscious mind.
Now, this is true of any language, but it's more true of Japanese
for two reasons, one negative, one positive.
The negative reason is that, if we're talking about other European languages,
Japanese is far more difficult to acquire.
And the reason for that is that it's very, very different.
With European languages we know a great deal of the vocabulary already,
even if it's in a form that takes a little while to recognize.
And we don't know the grammar, 
but the grammar isn't that different from things we're used to.
So it actually takes quite a lot of advancement in Japanese 
to get to the point where you can read a Japanese newspaper headline 
to the same level that you can get information from
an Italian newspaper headline even if you don't know a word of Italian.
Because you'll recognize half the vocabulary so you have a pretty good idea
of how it all fits together even though you don't know any Italian,
because it's a closely related language.
So that's the negative side.
And without anything to counterbalance it, without any magical keys,
it makes Japanese a much tougher proposition than any European language.
Fortunately, we do have magic keys.
Japanese is far more logical and rational than most European languages.
In most languages there are lots of things you just have to learn,
and ways of expressing things are something
that you just have to commit to memory.
In Japanese if you understand the structure,
a lot of things just start to make sense.
And your language-acquisition device, 
your subconscious mind, loves that kind of thing.
By using that kind of structure you're short-cutting processes
which would take enormous amounts of time to do intuitively.
And by doing this we start a virtuous circle, because 
at a relatively early stage we can start comprehending some Japanese;
we are able to start comprehensible input.
When we start comprehensible input, we start bedding down
our abstract knowledge into unconscious acquisition of language.
So all this lays the groundwork for comprehensible input, and
comprehensible input itself advances us further and further into the language.
Without comprehensible input you're not going to acquire the language at all.
In that, Professor Krashen and myself are completely at one.
And it's the same with anything, but language is much more complicated
than any other human activity so this is all the more important.
If you buy the best fishing pole in the world and you spend every Saturday
polishing it in your bedroom, you're still not going to catch any fish.
A fishing pole is a tool for catching fish, 
and structure is a tool for acquiring Japanese.
It will only start working for you when you take it out to the river.
If you have any questions or comments,
please put them in the Comments below
and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons
and all my patrons and supporters on Patreon and everywhere,
and everyone who comes to this channel, subscribes to this channel,
comments and likes the videos and, more importantly than anything else,
learns from the videos and goes deeper and deeper
into the wonderful world of Japanese,
takes that fishing pole out to the river 
and comes back with beautiful fish.
And I'd like to thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.