Konnichiwa.
Today we're going to talk about some 
new tools and tricks 
that will really help to streamline your use 
of Japanese.
Some you may know already.
One, the most important one, you probably
don't know.
And that is a completely new approach to 
 AI translation.
Now, I don't recommend the overuse of translators,
but there are some use cases 
in learning Japanese that have been pretty 
much marginal up to now, 
because Google Translate is really so inaccurate,
particularly with Japanese.
Well, the whole situation has changed, and
I'll talk about that in a moment.
First of all, let's talk about ways of using the
Japanese IME, the input mechanism, 
to make life easier and do some things that 
seem pretty much impossible 
unless you know how to go about them.
First and simplest, if you want to force katakana
when you're typing on a Windows keyboard,
all you have to do is press Alt+Caps Lock
and that puts you into katakana.
Control+Caps Lock will put you back into 
hiragana and, as you probably know, 
Shift+Caps Lock toggles between hiragana 
and romaji, so you don't have to 
switch keyboards every time you want to type 
English versus Japanese.
We talked a little while ago about Japanese
quotation marks.
If you're typing in kana, which I recommend, it's 
easy enough to get to regular quotation marks.
If you're typing in romaji it can be more
difficult.
But the simple way to do it is just type "kakko",
and if you do that you'll find that 
various kinds of brackets, including single 
and double quotation marks come up
along with the kanji suggestions. Those  
suggestions aren't just there for kanji.
They can do all sorts of things, as we're
about to find out.
For example, if you want to get that Japanese
wavy dash, which is important
in Japanese because a long dash looks 
the same as the vowel-extender mark 
used in katakana and occasionally
 hiragana too.
So to get the wavy dash, you just type "dasshu"
and you get a variety of dashes 
including the wavy dash.
How do you get exclamation marks and question
marks in Japanese?
Again, this is very easy. You don't have to switch 
 in and out of the romaji keyboard.
You just type "hatena" and that will give 
you a question mark 
("hatena" is the usual Japanese word for
 a question mark) 
or "bikkuri", and that will get you an 
exclamation mark.
And the more you use these...
The IME is quite smart and it will promote
them up the list of characters.
So if you're using them a lot, you'll probably
find you just have to type "ha" or "bi" and
you'll get the question mark or the exclamation
mark near to the top of the list.
Now, I do recommend typing directly in kana,
and I've done a video on how to do that, but
this doesn't matter -- whether you're typing
in kana or typing kana via romaji, 
either way it'll work. It'll also work 
on mobile devices,
if you're using flick input or if you're 
unfortunately typing via romaji.
If you want to get the null sign, the sign
 I use for the zero pronoun, 
which almost nobody seems to know how 
 to get from attempts to reproduce it in 
the Comments, you just type "kuushuu" and 
you'll get among the suggestions for that 
our zero or null sign that we use for the
 zero pronoun.
If you want to get circles -- often a double
circle is used to represent a missing word
or a word that could be any word --  
you just type "maru" 
and you get all kinds of circles including 
 those double circles.
If you want numbers in circles, which are often
used in Japanese for enumerating things,
really the simplest thing is just to type
a number ("ichi, ni, san", etcetera)
and among the suggestions will be that 
 number in a circle.
You may have to scroll down a bit to find 
 it, but again, if you're using it often,
it'll work its way up the list of suggestions.
Now, there are a lot of other fun things you
 can do if you want to with the IME.
For example, if you type "hoshi", you'll 
get various kinds of stars, 
including black ones, white ones, 
 and colored ones.
If you type "ha-to", you'll get various 
 kinds of hearts.
If you type "yajirushi", you'll get arrows of 
 various kinds pointing in all directions.
And if you type "kaomoji", you'll get a whole 
 variety of Japanese kaomoji, or emoticons,
which are quite fun to browse through.
And you can experiment yourself with other
words and see what you get.
Lots of interesting things tucked away in
that IME.
All right.
Now we're going to talk about the thing that's
revolutionized artificial intelligence translation.
It's free, and it's called DeepL.
Just look it up on Google or, if Google's
tried to block the competition,
look it upon DuckDuckGo.
As I say, I don't believe in using 
 translators too much, 
but there are occasions for using them.
For example, if you're writing something 
in Japanese...  Now, I do recommend
using the database approach for doing this, 
and I'll link that above my head
because it's a very important technique
for writing natural Japanese 
and a translator doesn't help you around that.
I don't recommend typing things in English
and seeing what the translator does.
What can be useful is that when you've made
your sentence in Japanese 
and maybe you're not quite sure about it, 
 run it through a good AI translator 
and see if it understands what you're saying.
See if it comes up with pretty much what it 
 was you were intending to say.
And DeepL is much better for this than 
Google Translate. Why?
Well, frankly, I'm not sure how people manage
 to program translation in Japanese 
when all they've got to go on is the fuzzy 
concepts of Western Japanese grammar 
as we find in textbooks and also in 
 academic papers.
DeepL seems to have stumbled on something
 closer to real Japanese structure,
and it works a lot better.
It's also a lot more au fait with Japanese
ways of putting things.
Google Translate often comes out with complete
errors or with over-literal translations that
say pretty much what the Japanese is literally
saying but not what it actually means.
Now, there are times when DeepL is perhaps
too sophisticated for its own good and 
comes out with very colloquial things or clever
guesses that aren't exactly right.
So if you're going to use this, I would go
to DeepL first, I'd also cross-check 
with Google Translate if you need to. It's  
much more pedestrian, 
it's not generally as accurate, but it can 
 give you a cross-check on DeepL.
Using the two in conjunction, with DeepL as
definitely the leader of the two, this can be
a handy technique for just finding out if 
what you said is what you meant to say.
You will still get false positives, but it 
 is an important tool along the way.
If you have any questions or comments, please
put them in the Comments below 
and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons,
my producer-angels, who make these videos
possible, and all my patrons and supporters
on Patreon and everywhere and everyone 
who likes and comments on these videos 
and everyone who watches them -- 
and of course, you, for attending this lesson.
Let's go on working together to
 improve our Japanese 
the way DeepL has improved the entire 
 field of artificial intelligence translation.
I was quite interested that it was called
"DeepL".
It's obviously a reference to Google's 
Deep Mind.
So that's quite a daring challenge to throw 
 down, and I'm very happy to see 
that the challenge is justified and that, for all 
 Google's money and research and power,
the rebels have for once defeated the Empire.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.