Konnichiwa.
Today we're going to do an anime walkthrough.
I'm going to show you, step by step, how we go through an anime, understanding and working it out.
And the anime I've chosen for this purpose is Shirokuma Cafe, which has a number of advantages.
It's not especially aimed at male humans or female humans, so it should appeal to everybody.
The characters speak, on the whole, slowly and relatively clearly.
None of them have regional accents like kansai-ben.
A lot of anime have at least one character who talks kansai-ben.
And we're going to have to have a look at that later, because if you don't know at least the rudiments of
kansai-ben you're going to be a bit anime-challenged, but we don't want to take that on at this stage.
And there isn't a lot of background music that makes the dialogue difficult to hear.
On top of this, there are a lot of episodes, and that's important because it's good to watch
a lot of the same anime, for a number of reasons, notably that every anime tends to have its own subset
of commonly used vocabulary, so it gives you more chance to get used to that.
And another very useful thing is that in Shirokuma Cafe, unlike most anime,
every episode is divided cleanly into two halves with two separate stories.
And the good thing about that is, as we were saying in our first anime lesson, you need
to put a story onto your phone or your iPod once you've worked through it
and then listen to it again and again and again.
And this is how you're going to get not just the vocabulary but Japanese itself into your system.
Now, it takes quite a long time to work through an anime in the early stages, which means
that your flow of new material onto your audio stream is going to be relatively slow.
However, with Shirokuma Cafe, once you've finished a story within an episode,
you can use the Audacity trick that I showed you, again in that first video, to trim down to the first story,
put that on your phone, then when you watch the second story, you can trim the audio down to that story,
put that onto your iPhone, and that speeds up your throughput of audio material.
All right. So, let's start with this first episode.
Now, I'm not going to do a complete walkthrough, every sentence in the show.
That would take a huge amount of time and make a very, very long video.
So I'm going to do some sentences at first and then some others,
just to give you an idea of how we go about this.
If enough of you want me to do a real walkthrough, I will try to do it.
I won't do it in place of my regular lessons, because I know lots of people are not going to want
me to stop doing the regular videos on all kinds of subjects every week.
So I'll try to squeeze those in as an extra some time midweek -- if enough of you want me to do it.
So if you do want me to do it, let me know in the comments below. All right.
So the very first subtitle in the show is the title of the first story,
which is "Shirokuma Cafe-he youkoso", and this just means "Welcome to Shirokuma Cafe".
"Youkoso" means almost literally "welcome", and we always use -he not -ni because it's a set phrase
and that's how it works. All right.
So, the first real subtitle, the first piece of dialogue -- and if this is your first subtitle,
your first piece of anime dialogue that you've ever looked at and worked on, then
you can make a wish, because you're allowed a wish on your first piece of anime dialogue. So, wish hard.
All right, let's go.
It is "Sasa-wo tabenagara nonbiri suru no-wa saikou da naa."
Now, what does this mean?
"Sasa" is "bamboo-grass".
Should you put this in your Anki?
Not unless you're particularly interested in having that particular kanji
and I would say don't worry about it at this stage.
"Sasa" itself -- "bamboo-grass" -- you're going to hear quite a lot, because Panda-kun eats it all the time
and there's going to be a character called Sasako, which is Bamboo-Grass Child.
She's just a regular human being, but she happens to be called Sasako (you get this kind of thing in anime).
So you're going to be hearing "sasa" a lot.
You can add it to your Anki if you want to, but what I would say is, don't clutter your Anki with it.
You're going to have to put plenty in your Anki.
It's not a piece of vocaulary you're going to need every day, and it will be adequately handled by the anime.
"Sasa-wo tabenagara" -- what does that mean?
Well, "-nagara" is a helper which goes onto the i-stem of a verb.
"Taberu", as we know, is an ichidan verb, so its i-stem is the same as all its other stems.
And "-nagara" is a conjunction.
It works as a conjunction to conjoin two clauses, and it says that while Clause A is happening,
Clause B is also happening.
So, "Sasa-wo tabenagara" means "While eating bamboo-grass"
and then it says "nonbiri suru no-wa saikou da naa".
"Nonbiri" is one of those nouns that works as an adverb all on its own,
and also if you add "suru" to it it works as a verb.
And what it means is "being at leisure / being leisurely / taking it easy",
so "nonbiri suru" means "being leisurely" or "lazing around".
"Saikou" is made up of two kanji: the first one, "sai", means "most"
and "kou", if you have some basic kanji, if you've done Alice in Kanji Land or anything like that,
you'll recognize this as the kanji we find in "takai" -- "high" -- and it means "high". "Kou" is its on-reading.
So "saikou" means literally "most high", and it's used to mean "best".
So, what Panda-kun is saying here, right at the beginning of the anime, is
"Eating bamboo-grass while lazing about is the best."
And then we have "naa", which I've talked about in another video.
It's a sentence-ender which addresses a remark to yourself.
So it's really making this all into an exclamation.
Panda-kun is saying to himself, "Eating bamboo-grass while laying about is the best, isn't it!"
Now his mother comes in and starts with the word "Chotto".
"Chotto" -- as you know, it means "a little" and it's often used in phrases like
"Chotto matte", meaning "Wait a minute", or
"Chotto ii?" which is like "Is a little good / Do you have a little time / Do you have a minute?", that kind of thing.
"Chotto" in this kind of situation is saying
"Hold up there / hold up a minute".
So it's really just a sentence introducer and in this case it's a bit of an irritated one.
"Chotto" -- "wait a minute / hold on there".
"Mata kono ko-wa hiruma-kara gorogoro shite."
Now, "mata" is "again"; "kono ko" -- "this child"; "hiruma" is "daytime / middle of the day";
"kara" in this case really means "during", it's actually literally "after" but in fact it means
"during/after daytime" -- not at night, not in the early morning, but after daytime, right in the thick of the day.
"Gorogoro" has a number of meanings.
It can be a cat's purr, or it can be something big and round, rolling.
"Korokoro" means "turning round and round" or "rolling".
"Gorogoro" by blunting that "korokoro" sound makes it feel heavier and slower.
The Gorons in Zelda -- those rock people who roll -- their name Goron comes from "gorogoro".
But it can also mean "lazing around" and in the case of Panda this is a very good choice,
because Panda is round and he does roll around while he's lazing around.
So "gorogoro suru" is a very good expression for the way Panda idles around.
And we're going to see that used for him quite often.
And then "shite" -- "shite", obviously, is that "gorogoro" into "suru", the act of lazing around,
and the sentence is then ended with a te-form, which is a connective form, but that's the end of the sentence.
And as I pointed out in another video, this is something we find very often in Japanese,
sentences ended on te-form or another conjunction, which implies there's something else to be said
although we're not saying it right now.
What is it that she was going to say?
Well, possibly something like "Wait a minute, once again ("mata") this child ("kono ko") lazing around is not good."
The "shite" is implying a negative comment on all of this.
And then she says, " Souji-no jama yo. Doki nasai."
Now, "souji" is "cleaning" (housecleaning or whatever), "jama" is "obstruction"
("jamming things up", we might say).
It's what we say when we enter somebody's house, "ojama shimasu" -- "I'm being an obstruction /
I'm entering your house and getting under your feet."
It's a humble way of saying you're going into somebody's house.
So, "souji-no jama" means "obstruction of the cleaning".
It's not a full sentence. She's just saying "Obstruction of the cleaning, you know."
"Doki nasai" -- now, "doki" is the i-stem of "doku", which means to "get out of the way".
And when you put "nasai" onto the end of the i-stem -- you're bound to be familiar with "nasai",
it's the same "nasai" that we find in set expressions like "oyasumi nasai", "gomen nasai",
and it's really asking someone to do something: "Take a rest / rest well" you might say in English.
When it's put on the end of the i-stem of a verb it makes a command
and the kind of command that you give to a child or an inferior.
So, "Doki nasai" means "Get out of the way."
So, those were the first few sentences.
After that, Panda gets out of the way and asks his mother for more bamboo-grass.
"Okawari" -- "okawari" means "a second helping" or "a refill."
And we're going to come across this word quite a lot, so let's fix that in our minds:
"okawari" is "a second helping / a second serving / a refill".
And his mother says, "Dou suru no, anata-no shourai-wa."
Now, this is an example of a turned-around sentence. We see a lot of these in casual speech.
"Dou suru no" means "What are you going to do?"
Literally it means "How ("dou" is a question word") are you going to do, are you going to act?"
So in English we'd say "What are you going to do?"
The "no" marks the question.
"No" can also in casual speech mark a statement as well as a question, so it's from the tone
or the context that we know that it's a question.
In this case, we also know that it's a question because "dou" -- "how" -- is a question word.
So "dou suru no" means "What are you going to do?"
and then she says "anata-no shourai-wa", which means "your future".
And as you see, this is turned around. Usually you would say "anata-no shourai-wa, dou suru no".
You set the topic first and then you make the comment.
But she's doing it the other way around, which is often done for emphasis or
because you're adding the topic as an afterthought.
So she makes the comment first, which is "What are you going to do?"
and then she makes the topic clear: "Your future".
So, "What are you going to do about your future?" is how we would say it in English.
And Panda-kun replies, "Mou, gorogoro shiteru toki-ni shourai-no hanashi nanka shinaide yo."
Now, "mou" here means "already", but it's often used to preface a complaint,
rather the way in English you might say "Enough already".
That "already" doesn't have a logical function exactly, but it tends to give the impression
that you've had enough and you're complaining: "Mou".
And then the actual sentence is "gorogoro shiteru toki" -- "the time of lazing around";
"gorogoro shiteru toki-ni" -- in the time of lazing around / at the time of lazing around";
"shourai-no hanashi nanka" -- "shourai", as we know, is "future"; "hanashi" is "talk";
"nanka" which in full is "nanika", "somewhat / something", when added after something like this
means "that type of thing", but it means it in a dismissive kind of way most of the time,
so you're saying "stuff like that", "nanka";
and "shinaide", "suru" with the helper adjective -nai in its te-form
-- now, you might say surely the te-form of the negative helper is "nakute" and it is,
but it has another special te-form, and don't worry that there are all kinds of different te-forms.
There aren't. I think it's only "nai" that I can think of that has two te-forms.
And this "naide" has two meanings. You only use it in these two circumstances:
You use it when you mean doing something without doing something else
-- if you say "A naide B suru", you're saying "doing A without doing B";
and the other use, and that's the one we've got here, is "Don't do this".
Now, you know the te-form can often be used to tell someone or ask someone to do something
-- "mite kudasai" means "please look", but you often just say "mite" or "mite, mite!": Look!"
"Naide" has that force as well, but it's rather more forceful.
It often gets used on its own. So, "shinaide" -- "Don't do".
So what Panda-kun is saying here is "Mou (which just prefaces a complaint), in my time of lazing around,
don't talk about stuff like my future."
And the mother says, "If you have the free time ("shima"), then you should get a part-time job ("baito")."
"Baito" actually comes from the German "arbeit", which means "work".
The Japanese word is "arubaito", which only has the meaning of a part-time job
and is very often reduced to just "baito".
And Panda-kun's reply is "Ee, gorogoro suru no-ni isogashii kara ato-ni suru yo", which means
"Because I'm busy lazing around, do this later / talk about my getting a job later."
"Ato-ni suru" means "put something off till later".
"Put this off till later, because I'm busy right now lazing around."
And this annoys his mother, as you might expect, so she sucks him with the vacuum cleaner.
And this is the way she punishes Panda-kun when he's being a bad panda.
And Panda-kun cries, "Aa! Suwanaide! "
This "suu" means "suck".
It's the same "suu" that we use in "tabako-wo suu", which means to "suck tobacco" or "smoke".
In this case it's attaching the negative helper verb -nai with that imperative -de te-form.
"Suu-wa naide!" -- "Don't suck! Don't suck!"
So as a result of this he leaves the house and goes into the konbini.
And in the konbini he notices some magazines advertising work.
So he takes a few of these up to the "ten'in-san", the person serving at the counter, and says,
"Eeto, hatarakanaide okane-ga moraeru shigoto-ga notte iru no-wa dore desu ka?"
"Hatarakanaide" gives us this other meaning of "naide", it's "without doing".
So, without working ("hataraku" is work), without working, "okane-ga moraeru" -- that
means "can get money" -- "shigoto", so work ("shigoto" is "work") work that you can get
money for, so occupation that you can get money for without working.
"Ga notte iru" -- now, "noru" means to "put something on something", but in this case
it means to "publish something in a magazine".
So what he's asking here is "In which of these magazines ("dore")...
In which of these magazines is published occupations for which you can get money without doing any work?"
And the ten'in-san seems to think that they don't exist.
Panda returns home and gets vacuum-cleaned again and leaves the house and sees a butterfly
with a thread attached to its little feet and stops to try to help it.
Now, Panda-kun is usually rather a selfish individual so it is perhaps a little unusual
for him to do an act of kindness to another creature.
The butterfly flies away with the thread still attached
and Panda-kun follows it down what seems like a magical pathway.
It's a rather beautiful scene, like a magical transformation from Panda-kun's everyday world
through an act of kindness and through following a golden butterfly and a magic thread
into a place where his life will be changed forever.
So, I think you get the general idea of how we go about this.
If there are any things in this episode that really puzzle you, please put them in the Comments below,
and if you'd like me to do a complete walkthrough bit-by-bit in between the other videos,
please let me know that in the Comments below.
I'm not sure if I'll find time to do it, but I'll try if I can.
And of course if you have any regular questions or comments, they go in the Comments below too
and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons, my producer-angels, who make these videos possible,
and all my patrons and supporters on Patreon and everywhere.
You'll find my Red Kokeshi patrons credited in the information section below.
And I'd like to thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.