Konnichiwa.
Today we're going to talk about intensive wide reading: "tadoku".
And we're going to talk a little about the Tadoku Contest,
which is a period in which one spends two weeks or a month
concentrating as far as possible on maximizing one's reading of Japanese.
Now, the contest is important, as far as I'm concerned, not because it is a contest,
but simply because it delineates that period,
creates a period in which we concentrate on
deep reading immersion as far as we can.
A lot of people have said things to me which have been surprisingly similar.
Several people have said on different occasions without knowing each other
that their first serious Tadoku Contest was the first time
they really experienced Japanese getting into their soul.
And this, I think, is the real importance of the contest.
There are all kinds of practical reasons why intensive
wide reading is a very good thing for your Japanese,
but I'm not really going to talk about that very much.
That isn't the most important thing.
The most important thing is, you might say, almost spiritual.
And that's what we really need.
Because I've talked on many occasions about the huge advantage that
English as learned by foreigners has over Japanese as learned by foreigners.
We all know and have encountered people all over the Internet,
here on YouTube and in other places,
who are not native speakers of English,
whose English is not always anywhere near perfect,
who create all kinds of things in English for us.
And many, many others who don't create things but who
participate in various levels in the Internet, in English.
Now, for these people the point of English is not English.
The point of English is whatever it is that they're doing in English.
English, we might say, has entered their soul.
It has become a real medium of communication,
a medium through which they're experiencing things and expressing things.
This is terribly rare with foreign learners of Japanese.
And it's for this reason, I think, that we have this extraordinary culture
in the English-language Japanese-learning community
of wanting to be very, very good at Japanese.
When two of the "stars" or influencers in the English Japanese-learning community get together,
the great question is "Whose Japanese
is the best?"
Now, if you think about these foreign users of English, creators, influencers
and just ordinary people who live and interact on the Internet,
who's worrying about how good their English is?
If you see a foreign YouTuber in English and their great claim to fame is having
wonderful, impeccable English that you can barely tell from a native,
how interested would you be?
You wouldn't be interested at all.
This is the difference between English and Japanese.
English is treated by everyone as a means of communication.
Japanese is treated by most foreign learners outside of Japan as a game like tennis or golf.
There's nothing you can do with tennis or golf except get very, very good at tennis or golf.
But language, for the most part, isn't like that.
You can make it like that. You can make anything like that.
But it isn't what language is; it isn't what it's for.
The real purpose of language is communication
and it is precisely getting inside your soul,
that's to say, becoming a part of your life,
becoming a part of what you think, what you say, what you experience.
How possible is it to do this with Japanese?
There aren't the same opportunities for doing it but I believe it is possible.
Now, you obviously need to assess what your own goals are,
what your own relationship with Japanese is.
Maybe what you want is just to be able to speak Japanese very, very well
so that nobody can tell you from a native speaker.
And if that's what you want, well, that's fine.
It's a laudable aim. Go ahead. Pursue it.
But maybe you want something deeper.
Maybe your relationship with Japanese is different from
the relationship between a player and a game.
And if that's the case, I can't tell you,
because everybody's path is her own path,
everybody's path is different, I can't tell you how to achieve that,
but I can say that, in my experience,
for many people the first step on that path
lies precisely in these periods of intensive reading,
of reading as much Japanese as possible.
Because it's at this time that Japanese starts to take on
the character of a real language rather than an achievement.
It's at this time that, for the first time in many cases,
you start to understand what I've been saying when I say
that you don't learn words through Anki, you only use Anki to pin words in place,
because for the first time, especially at
the upper beginner/lower intermediate stage when you're reading pretty simple material,
you come across the same words again and again
and they stop being "vocabulary words" and turn into words, with their own weight,
with their own character, with their own delicate flavor and color.
None of this is in your Anki.
None of this is in your dictionary.
This is in the experience of getting Japanese into your soul.
And, if you've followed my structure course --
and of course I believe that structure is vitally important or I wouldn't be talking about it.
Structure is the skeleton of the language.
If it wasn't there, the language wouldn't be able to hold its shape.
And if you don't understand it, it's much, much harder to come to understand the language.
But as you immerse yourself in intensive reading of Japanese,
you suddenly reach a point where you start to think,
"Yes, the structure's extremely useful, but I now start seeing it for what it is.
It's the skeleton of the language, the skeleton of a living, breathing, dancing, beautiful language."
And without the flesh and blood and hair and teeth and eyes of that language,
the skeleton is no better than the skeleton in the corner of the biology classroom.
Why reading? Can't we do it through other means, like anime?
Of course we can, and indeed for wide reading some of our reading may well be anime subtitles.
But I would say that the activity of reading books or visual novels or manga
does force us to engage directly with the words, with the language as language.
And the intensiveness of reading as much as we can during a particular period
has an effect if one does it concentratedly and intensively.
It has that effect of creating a kind of breakthrough,
not a breakthrough in ability, something actually deeper and more important than that:
a breakthrough in one's relationship with the language.
And that in the end is the most important thing of all.
Now, for the time of this coronavirus crisis, I am opening Team Organic,
the team of my dear supporters that participates in the Tadoku Contest,
to anyone, whether they are patrons or not.
So if you'd like to join the next contest or current contest if there's one running right now --
don't worry about joining late, let's just get in there and immerse ourselves
-- please feel free to do so.
I'll put details of the contest and of Team Organic in the information section below.
And I'm looking forward to seeing you there.
If you have any questions or comments,
please put them in the Comments below and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons,
who make these videos possible,
and all my patrons, my producer-angels,
who have so generously allowed me to open
my Patreon to all of you in this time of crisis,
and to you, for watching this video and for being part
of the group of people who is making all this possible.
Thank you, all of you.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.