Hello, pretty peoples.
KawaJapa no Kyua Dorii desu. I am Cure Dolly from
KawaJapa. Today, we are going to talk about
the fact that the no-particle can replace the ga-particle in subordinate clauses.
That sounds horrible, doesn't it? It sounds
illogical, random and very complicated – and in fact, it's nothing of the sort. Like most of Japanese,
it is simple, logical and very easily
intuitively grasped.  But
this way of describing it – with "subordinate clauses" – is based in European grammar, not Japanese grammar,
and it
confuses the whole issue and takes away our ability to logically grasp what's going on.
So, let's begin by quickly refreshing our memories on what the no-particle is. The no-particle is the possessive
particle. It marks the possessive case and it's the only particle that has an exact equivalent in the English language.
The English no-particle is 's. So we say "Sakura no boushi" or
"Mary's hat". The 's and the no do exactly the same thing, and
the no-particle is doing this even when
it's turning a noun into an adjective, but I'll explain that on another occasion.
For this time, let's look at a sentence where no can
replace ga. First of all, let's have it with the ga.
"Watashi ga tabeta keeki wa oishikatta" - "The cake I ate was
delicious." Now, we know how the ga-particle works, don't we? It binds together every sentence,
connecting a thing that is doing or being something with what it is doing or being. That's what a
sentence is – in Japanese or any other language. In Japanese, it always has to be bound with the ga-particle.
And in this sentence, the main ga, the primary ga,
the ga that is binding together the whole sentence, is not actually visible. This sentence is bound together by the invisible ga because
we've said "keeki wa oishikatta desu" – which means "As for the cake, it was
delicious." And we very likely chose that wa in order to avoid the slight inelegance of two gas in the same sentence.
The
skeleton sentence, the main sentence, is
"keeki
ga
oishikatta" – "keeki ga oishikatta" – "The cake
was delicious." The rest of the sentence is simply telling us something about that cake.
"Watashi ga tabeta keeki" –
"Watashi ga tabeta" is a complete logical sentence in itself – "I ate."
You can use this on its own.
"Did you eat today" – "Yes, I ate."
In this sentence, however, it's not working as a standalone sentence. It's working as an adjective.
It is what we can call an adjectival
clause. It's telling us something more about
the cake.
What cake was it? It was the cake I ate. We could say, the blue cake, the coffee cake, the yellow cake,
the horrible cake. We can use any kind of adjective but we can
also use an entire logical clause as an adjective  –  the "I ate" cake, the cake I ate. Now,
this
is the kind of sentence in which you can use no in place of ga. You can't use it for the
main ga of a sentence, the ga that's tying everything together. You can only use it
for an adjectival ga. And why can we do that? Well, let's look at an English equivalent.
"Her shouting at the waiter upset me." Now, the sub-sentence here is "She shouted at the waiter" but
we have turned it around into "Her shouting at the waiter." What we've done is, we've turned it into a noun.
Her shouting at the waiter is the shouting at the waiter that she did.
She possesses it because she did it. It was her shouting at the waiter.
We do something very similar in Japanese,
only it doesn't turn the logical clause into a noun. It turns it into an adjective.
So, we can say "Watashi no tabeta keeki ga
oishikatta" – "My ate cake was delicious."
It's working in exactly the same way.  "My ate cake" is the cake I
ate. I
own the action. I did it. In English again,
we might say "My broken window got me into trouble." "My broken window" here means the window I broke.
We can't use it in all cases in English – for example, we
wouldn't say "my ran mile" meaning the mile I ran, but in Japanese
we can use it in all cases: "my broken window", "my ate cake",
"my ran mile" – "watashi no hashitta mairu".
And really it's as simple as that. If we want to put it in an active manner, we can say,
"Watashi ga tabeta keeki wa oishikatta", but we can also say, "Watashi no tabeta
keeki wa oishikatta." One means "The cake I ate was delicious", the other one means "My eaten cake
was delicious". "My eaten" in the sense of "I was the one who ate it." So you see that no is not just
randomly substituting
for ga. It is doing something very similar to something
we do in English. If we understand that,
we don't start
counting on our fingers and wondering whether the ga has become the no or the no has become the ga or whatever.
It's nothing like that. It's very simple, straightforward,
logical, intuitive grammar.  Please remember that the textbook for this course of lessons is "Unlocking Japanese".
You can get it at Amazon in paperback or Kindle editions, and we recommend reading the book along
with attending this course of lessons. Thank you for watching once again.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegaishimasu.
Class dismissed.