Minnasan, konnichiwa.
This isn't one of my regular videos and it's not going to be very long.
It's concerning the response of this channel to the present period of crisis.
Many of you may not be able to continue with your normal life activities during this period,
and one of the few good things that could come out of this very bad period is that
it may provide an opportunity to level up your Japanese.
In order to help with this, I'll be doing two things.
One is that for this time of crisis most of the posts on my Patreon will be open to the public,
which means that whether you're a patron or not you can share the content.
The other is that very soon a tadoku contest is coming up.
Now, a tadoku contest is a contest in which everybody tries to read as much Japanese as possible
over a period, in this case two weeks.
Now, this isn't my contest, and if you want to join it, you're perfectly free to do so.
What we do at my Patreon is that we have a thing called Team Organic.
Every patron who takes part in the contest and who wants to be is a member of Team Organic.
And I report regularly on how the contest is doing, how each of the members is performing.
Now, this is not a contest in the ordinary sense.
There are no gold medals. There are no losers.
Everyone who succeeds in leveling up her own Japanese, increasing her own immersion, is a winner.
And it doesn't matter whether you're working at a very low level,
perhaps registering a few sentences from a Japanese learning application
or a page or two from a graded reader,
or whether you're reading hundreds of pages of novels.
You can register anime subtitles.
You can register sentences from games.
You can register anything that is Japanese reading.
The importance of Team Organic, I believe, is that
self-immersion and mass input can be at times a little bit of a lonely path.
This gives us a way to feel that we're part of a team working together.
Everyone can comment on the posts, share their own experiences of the contest,
their own experiences of immersion and mass input.
Massive reading input is one of the most important things we can do for our Japanese,
and I'm going to talk about that and the contest in a video very soon.
But if you'd like to join Team Organic or just read some of my public posts,
I'll put details in the information section below and look forward very much to seeing you.
So, let's all rise to this crisis and make it a positive time of progress.
Minnasan, ganbarimashou!
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Dolly out.