Konnichiwa.
Today we're going to talk about an expression
that you see all the time in anime, manga,
light novels, &c and can be confusing for
two reasons. One is that the apparent etymology,
the apparent base of the word, is very obvious
but it's completely misleading. And the other is
that because of the way it's used, it's often
a bit unclear about which way it's pointing
and what it's actually doing. However, once
we get clear about this, it's very, very easy
to understand. The expression is "kuse-ni".
Now, the etymological problem is that whereas
we all know what "kuse" means -- it means
a "habit or idiosyncrasy" -- but it's not
very clear what that has to do with the expression
"kuse-ni". And the answer is: nothing. Some
Japanese etymological sources tell us that
this "kuse" was actually a different "kuse"
originally, but nobody really seems to know
for sure. But the point is that it really
has very little to do with the modern usage.
All we really need to know is that "kuse-ni"
is a contrastive conjunction like "no-ni".
Now, I've done a video about "no-ni" and I'll
put a link here, but I'm going to assume that
you basically know what it is and what it does.
"No-ni" and "kuse-ni" are contrastive
conjunctions, which means that they're like
"demo" or "keredo". They join two clauses
in a manner that means "despite Clause A,
Clause B / even though Clause A, Clause B".
Now, "kuse-ni" has two things in common with
"no-ni". One is that it's generally negative
in its implications, and the other is that
the second clause quite often gets omitted.
So we're saying, "although Clause A..." and
then not going on to say what clause B is.
We're just implying it. "No-ni" does that
quite often and so does "kuse-ni". The difference
between "no-ni" and "kuse-ni" is that "kuse-ni"
not only has a negative implication but it
has most of the time a very specific kind
of negative implication. And this special
usage is essentially taking the nature or
character or position of a person and then
contrasting their actions with it in a way
that is highly unfavorable, so we could use
"no-ni" in these situations, but "no-ni" would
sound more regretful. "Kuse-ni" sounds much
more forceful. It often sounds like severe
criticism. And, as we say, it's making this
kind of contrast, the contrast between what
we expect of a certain type and what they
actually do, and it's a negative contrast.
So, for example, we might say, "okane mochi-no
kuse-ni kechi da" (despite the fact that she's
well off/she's rich, she's stingy). "Onna-no
kuse-ni heya-ga mechakucha da" (despite the
fact that she's a girl, her room's a mess).
"Otoko-no kuse-ni naite iru" (despite the
fact that he's a man, he's crying). And these
are generally intended in an offensive manner.
They're intended to register harsh criticism.
So we're taking the position of the person
and what we expect of that kind of person
and then saying something that's in contrast
to it. But very often we also leave that out.
So, for example, suppose some bad people or
monsters break into the house and the heroine
confronts them and the hero is cowering in
a corner. The heroine might just say, "Otoko-no
kuse-ni", which literally means "Despite the
fact that you're a man" but doesn't then say
anything about it. In English probably a non-structural
but natural translation would be "And you're
supposed to be a man". And this can cause
confusion because it can lead to constructions
that confuse us about what's really going
on and which way "kuse-ni" is pointing. So,
for example, "otoko-no kuse-ni nakanaide yo".
Now what's going on here? "Despite the fact
that you're a man, stop crying"? Is that what
it's saying? Well, no, it isn't. "Otoko-no
kuse-ni" is being used in a trailing manner
like the previous example. And then "nakanaide
yo" is being added to that trailing insult,
as it were, and that's a command. I've done
a video on commands. So, "nakanaide yo" is
not a sentence, it's just a command: "Stop
crying!" Just as in English "Stop crying"
is not a sentence with a subject and a predicate.
It's just a command. So really those two statements
should be separated by a period (or in Japanese
a "maru") because they're not part of the
same sentence, but they won't necessarily
be when you see them written and they won't
necessarily have a wide gap when you hear
them spoken. "Otoko-no kuse-ni nakanaide yo":
these are two separate statements and if
we don't understand that it can confuse us
about the use of "kuse-ni". Another thing
that can be confusing is that the connection
may go the other way around. Generally speaking,
we take the qualities of a person, which are
fundamentally good qualities -- being a man,
being a girl, being rich -- and then adding
something negative to it: Despite the fact
that you're a girl, the room's a mess / Despite
the fact that you're a man, you're hiding
in the corner / Despite the fact that you're
rich, you're stingy. But it can go the other
way around too. For example, we might say
"heta-na kuse-ni nesshin da". This means "despite
the fact that he's unskilful/useless, he's
enthusiastic". Now, this generally isn't used
in a positive sense. It's meaning: here's
this person going around being all enthusiastic,
and he's useless, he can't do anything. So
it can also work that way around and we need
to be aware of that, because that again can
fool us. Most of the time the contrastive
conjunction goes the way around we've been
talking about, but it doesn't have to. Now,
if this was a textbook or a JLPT instruction
we would talk about what they call the "setsuzoku"
(the conjunctions): how does "kuse-ni" attach
to what comes before it? We know how it attaches
to what comes after it: it's simply a clause
connector so what comes after it is the second
clause, which could be left off. But what
the standard texts will talk about is how
it connects to what comes before it: with
a noun you use -no, with an adjectival noun
you use -na, with an adjective you don't use
anything. None of this, of course, is necessary
if you've done structural Japanese.
"Kuse", whatever it is, whatever its etymology,
is a noun. We pretty much know that, because
anything that isn't a verb or an adjective is a
noun in Japanese. What comes before "kuse"
is modifying "kuse", it's telling us what
kind of "kuse" we're talking about.
And it does that in exactly the same way that 
every modifier always modifies a noun.
So, if it's a noun, which it most often is, then we
use -no for modifying the other noun that's
following it just as we always do: "otoko-no kuse / 
onna-no kuse-ni". If it happens to be an
adjectival noun, then obviously we use -na as
we did with "heta-na kuse-ni". And if it's
an adjective obviously we don't need anything else
 -- adjectives modify nouns directly. 
That's what an adjective does. So we might say 
"wakai kuse-ni otoshi yori-ni seki-wo youzuranai" 
(even though she's young, she doesn't 
give up her seat to older people). 
If it were a verb, obviously we'd just use the verb 
to modify the noun as we always do.
So I think now that you won't have
any problems with "kuse-ni". 
If you have any problems or questions,
 about that or anything else,
please put them in the Comments below
and I will answer as usual. I'd like to thank
my Gold Kokeshi patrons, my producer-angels,
who make these videos possible, and all my
patrons and supporters. One of the things
that our revolution in Japanese is doing is
not just showing us techniques to apply but
showing us that we need to apply them flexibly.
Some techniques apply sometimes and not other
times. History and etymology of words can
be very useful on occasion, and I've done
videos about that. And whenever I do a video
about that, even if I point out that history
and etymology are not always very useful,
people start asking me, "Do you know the history
of this, do you know the history of that?"
And well, of course I can just look it up
in most cases. You can't always find it in
English but you can usually find it in Japanese.
But the point is that there are occasions
where the etymology helps us enormously, there
are occasions where it doesn't help us at all,
there are occasions where it could help us 
somewhat but it's a rather roundabout route
and we can shortcut it by learning things by
another method. Part of our revolution here
is getting away from the rigid approach of
textbooks. But always applying the fundamental
structural knowledge, because structural knowledge
gives us the core we need to get us away from
rote learning of this and rote learning of that.
Thank you all for your help in this revolution.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.