Konnichiwa.
Today I want to talk about the so-called 
intermediate plateau, 
which is an idea we hear about in
language-learning circles.
But I want to really turn this idea upside
down, because in some ways 
it's an illusion and in other ways it
can be a real phenomenon
but it's not the phenomenon that this concept 
 leads us to believe that it is.
And the reason it's misdiagnosed is essentially
the way of looking at language and 
looking at the world that both conventional 
study-oriented and
modern immersion-oriented language-learning 
methods have.
Essentially, the obsession with language learning
itself is often the problem.
Now, this is not to say that there cannot
be intermediate problems,
but they're a set of particular problems which 
need to be addressed in ways
appropriate to your particular goals
and learning style.
So, first of all let's look at the way in
which the intermediate plateau is 
a kind of reality but also an illusion 
and inevitable.
The reason for it is that if we look at how
second-language learners learn language
as opposed to how first-language learners 
(infants) learn language,
there are certain myths that most
people accept.
One is that children learn language quickly
and easily. They don't.
They're in fact very slow language learners.
It takes a child about five years to get to the
point where she can hold a conversation:
not a very sophisticated conversation, just an
actual conversation that really is a conversation.
It takes her another five years to
get to the point  
where she can have anything like
an adult conversation 
Now, that isn't just because of her 
language skills, 
but it's taken her all this time to develop 
those language skills.
An adult learner of a second language does
it much, much faster.
And the reason she does it much, much faster
is that she has certain advantages, 
certain force multipliers, that aren't available 
to the infant learner.
And the main one, the most powerful one, the
one that really kicks in from the beginning,
is the ability to understand language concepts
in abstract terms, to grasp rules and 
general principles and apply them, rather than 
intuiting them from thousands and thousands 
and thousands and thousands of examples,
which is what a small child has to do.
Now, some pure AJATT people, and I don't think
there are many of them around because 
most of them at least agree that a bit of what
they call grammar is helpful, but the ones
that are really dedicated and never do anything
but their ten thousand sentences, might think
that they're doing pure child-like immersion
and not using the force multiplier of abstraction,
but that's not actually true, because for
at least a thousand sentences 
they have to use English translations,
and when you do that you can 
bring into play abstract concepts that you 
 have in English.
So even the worst set of abstractions, the
ones that you find in Genki and elsewhere,
many of which mislead you and actually 
lead you off the point of 
how the language is really structured, they 
still are structure of some kind and 
they still speed things up to a very considerable 
extent over the way a child has to do it, 
groping hand over hand through thousands
and thousands of examples.
And when I say that adult learners learn faster
than children and talk about a child 
taking five years to become conversational,
that's actually underestimating 
the whole thing by a great deal, because  
language learning isn't counted in years, 
it isn't counted in months, it isn't counted 
 in weeks, it's counted in hours.
And the child spends far, far, far more hours
in those five years on the language than even
the most dedicated learner who's outside of
Japan is likely to be able to spend.
So, once we get past the early stages, once
we have the structure, in some form or other,
in our heads, our comparative advantage 
diminishes very rapidly.
Getting from knowing nothing to being able
to form basic sentences takes place very rapidly.
Getting from able to form basic sentences
to understand even quite complex sentences
takes place relatively rapidly.
But once we've got past those early stages
where our force multiplier is really working
hard for us, things seem to slow down, but
they're not actually slowing down.
We might be learning a lot of vocabulary -- and
we've got a lot of vocabulary to learn.
We might be learning all kinds of things,
but they aren't as spectacular.
They don't give us the same sense of continually
leaping forward as we get from 
the early stages where we're really picking up 
the basics at a cracking rate.
So to this extent the intermediate plateau
is an illusion.
It's not that we're not learning as much, it's
not that we're not learning as quickly,
it's that the obvious results of our learning
are much less apparent, 
so it appears to have slowed down.
We're thinking "Gosh, I was just making progress
hand over fist in the past, and now I seem
to be staying in the same place for much longer."
So to that extent the intermediate 
plateau is an illusion.
But there are some areas in which it is genuine.
Now, I'm going to read you from a message
sent to me and we're going to look at
his problem and see how that relates
to the overall problem.
All right.
Now, what I would ask this person is not what
the usual "intermediate plateau" crowd is
going to think about, but these, as far as
I'm concerned, are the important questions.
First of all, what are your goals?
What is it that you can't do now that you
want to be able to do?
And secondly, why are you reading these stories?
Why are you reading horror stories and two
pages of a novel every day?
Are you reading the stories in order to learn
Japanese or are you learning Japanese in order
to read the stories? It makes a big difference.
Are you reading the stories because this is
what you want to be doing
or are you reading them in order to 
"learn Japanese" (in quotes)?
And again, what is it that you want to be
doing that you can't do right now?
Is it that you want to read the stories faster?
Is it that you're not understanding them properly?
Is it that the vocabulary isn't sticking?
Is it that you want to be able to understand
spoken Japanese when you hear it 
and you still can't do that?
Is it that you want to be able to read more
abstract material?
It's no good just saying "I want to learn
Japanese". That's too vague.
What are your actual goals, what do you want,
what's the next step, what are you after?
Are you enjoying what you're doing, and 
 if not why are you doing it?
Do you want to be doing something else, and
if so what is it?
One of the reasons that the so-called "intermediate
plateau" is talked about is that we have this
whole abstract concept of "learning Japanese",
whatever that's supposed to mean.
We shouldn't move from the beginner stage
to the so-called "intermediate stage".
We should move from the beginner stage where
we can't help studying Japanese: 
we've actually got to look at structure 
and see how it works,
we've actually got to look at vocabulary 
and get some basic vocabulary.
Once we move past that stage we shouldn't
move into the next stage of learning 
called the "intermediate stage".
We should move into the stage of living Japanese.
This is how people actually learn language.
They learn language by using it and using
it because they want to use it.
So, are you happy with reading horror stories
and a couple of pages of a novel?
Or are you just waiting for some "result"
from doing that?
And if so, what result are you expecting?
Or is this not your end goal, are you wanting
to read about quantum physics 
or are you wanting to watch talks on YouTube 
and you can't do it yet?
If it's that, you're not going to do it by
just going on reading stories.
Every area of Japanese is a skill in itself.
If you want to read abstract material, you
need to start reading some abstract material.
You can't jump straight into quantum physics
but you can start reading more abstract things,
you can start looking things up in Japanese
Wikipedia, etc.
You've got to make steps in the direction
you want to go.
But in order to do that, you've got to know
the direction in which you want to go.
If you want to hear Japanese, you want to
listen to spoken Japanese on YouTube
or talk to Japanese people, listening is 
a skill in itself.
It actually involves a very different skill-set
from reading Japanese, 
and I've made a video about this. You need to 
watch it if you really want to know
how to start listening to Japanese as
opposed to just reading it.
If you're happy with reading your novels and
your stories, read your novels and your stories.
The point is that you're past the stage where
you're learning Japanese
in the sense of memorizing stuff just for
the sake of memorizing it.
You're at the stage where you can be living
Japanese and you should be enjoying it.
Japanese is a journey, and if you're not 
enjoying the journey, 
you probably won't enjoy the destination, 
especially as there's no 
destination marker, there's no point you arrive 
and say, "Ah, now I've learned Japanese!"
And if that was your goal, why?
Is it like stamp-collecting, you wanted another
one for your album?
You've got to ask yourself, what are you actually
doing apart from "learning Japanese"?
What's your aim, what's your goal?
If you want to read stories, read stories.
Go on reading stories; you'll get better at
reading stories.
If you want to do something else, you need
to be moving towards those particular skills.
So this whole "intermediate plateau" thing
is a mixture of illusion and confusion.
Illusion because apparent slowing down in
learning the language (so-called) is inevitable,
and confusion because the ideology of language-learning
websites and language-learning channels
is language learning as an end in itself. And  
language learning isn't an end in itself.
Language learning is a living process in which
we learn to do what we want to do,
what we need to do, in the language. 
 It's a set of goals.
Practicing one particular skill doesn't magically
give us other skills (although it helps).
So we have to break down what it is we 
 really want to do.
We have to have the will and desire 
to do it.
If we don't really want to do it, 
then don't do it.
If you're only doing it in order to learn
Japanese, then ask yourself,
 why do you want to learn Japanese? 
 What's the goal here?
What's the aim? What's the end product?
What do you actually want out of it?
If you're enjoying what you're doing now,
go on doing it.
If you're not enjoying it, stop doing it.
If you want to be doing other things as well,
start moving towards doing those other things.
Forget about the "intermediate plateau".
Forget about "learning Japanese" and move
into living Japanese.
If you have any questions or comments, please
put them in the Comments below 
and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons,
my producer-angels, who make these videos
possible, and all my patrons and supporters
on Patreon and everywhere.
Thank you for making this adventure possible.
And thank you for making it possible for us
to overturn the old
hidebound ideas about learning language.
Together we're moving away from these 
old models that are so restrictive 
and into a new world of vibrant, living Japanese.
Thank you so much.
And thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.