Hello, pretty peoples.
KawaJapa no Kyua Dorii desu.
Today we're going to discuss ichidan versus godan verbs.
Some people call them u-verbs and ru-verbs, and that's really quite ridiculous because
all verbs end in the u sound.
Only a minority end in the actual う kana.
All ichidan verbs end with ru, but then so do a number of godan verbs, and that's the
very problem we're here to discuss.
If my voice sounds a little strange, I apologize.
I have contracted a slight digital virus which
is affecting my throat circuits.
I should be better by next time.
Now, I am always telling you that there are
very, very, very few things in Japanese grammar
that you need to learn on a case-by-case basis the way the textbooks tend to teach it.
You just need to learn the underlying logic and then you have whole chunks of Japanese
grammar easily assimilable.
That's what I'm here to do.
However, the case of ichidan verbs versus ru-ending godan verbs is one of the few areas
where you really do have to learn things on a case-by-case basis.
But wait!
Don't start getting out any lists of verbs to learn.
That's not the way to do it.
You don't need to do it and it's a complete waste of your time if you do do it.
Why?
Let me explain.
The first thing I'll say, just in case your textbook didn't tell you – and they don't always
– the only ambiguous ru-ending verbs are those that end with the sound iru or eru.
Because ichidan verbs can only end -iru or -eru.
That is to say, before the ru there must be a kana from the i-row or a kana from the e-row.
If not, then it's a godan verb – no ambiguity about it.
But of the rest – the iru and eru-ending verbs – the majority are ichidan, but there
is a significant number of commonly used iru/eru-ending godan verbs.
And that's the problem.
So how do we solve that problem and why am I telling you not to learn lists?
Well, to begin with, let's look rationally
at when you actually need to know this.
If you're reading something in a book or hearing it or watching anime with subtitles or in
any other way passively inputting the word, you don't need to know whether that word is
ichidan or godan.
In other words, as long as it's part of your passive vocabulary, you don't need that information.
It's given to you on a need-to-know basis by the text itself.
When do you actually need to know it?
When you start outputting it.
Now, everyone who is learning language organically, from small children onward, learns the word
first as part of their passive vocabulary, and over time it moves into their active vocabulary.
That's how children learn language.
They hear it a lot of times and then they
start trying to use it.
So we need to know whether a word is ichidan or godan when it is part of our active vocabulary.
And the truth is, by the time it's part of our active vocabulary, by the time it's no
longer just a word we hear sometimes but a word we can actually use, we know the word.
It is a friend.
And we will know whether it's ichidan or godan.
Not because we've memorized a rule or a fact, but because we will be familiar with at least
one instance of the word which tells us whether it's ichidan or godan.
As a matter or fact, even before you started learning Japanese, you knew such instances.
You just didn't know at that stage how to
apply them.
Let me give you an example.
You know the word "kimono", don't you?
"Kimono" is made up of two words: "kiru" –wear; and "mono" – thing.
"Kimono" is a wear-thing, a traditional article of Japanese clothing.
Now, if you know the word "kimono", you also know that "kiru" – wear – is an ichidan
verb.
How do you know that?
Because the word is "kimono" not "kirimono".
It it were a godan verb, it would have to
be "kirimono".
If it's "kimono" it must be an ichidan verb.
If you don't know why that is, then watch
my video on the subject.
But also, if you don't know why that is, you
certainly don't need to know which verbs are
ichidan and which verbs are godan at this
stage.
Now, there are many, many other instances of this.
For example, if you know that "aruite imasu" is the formal version of "aruite iru" – they
both mean: be walking; "iru" means be, "aruite" is the te-form of walk – if you know "aruite
imasu" or anything else imasu , then you know that "iru" is an ichidan verb.
Why?
Because it's "imasu" not "irimasu".
So you see that by the time you get to the
stage of needing to know, you will know.
Not necessarily in the abstract, but you will have instances that you can quickly reverse-engineer
to tell you whether any given word out of
the small proportion of words that are ambiguous
is ichidan or godan.
So why do people think they have to learn
this from lists?
I think it's because textbooks are built around exams and even books that aren't textbooks
tend to get their Japanese structure taken
from textbooks, and they are all built around
exams.
And exams sometimes ask you to know things out of context.
Well, if you're learning Japanese organically, you don't need to know anything out of context.
What if you do?
What if you are going in for an exam or for
some other reason you need to know whether
a word is ichidan or godan out of context.
Well, don't try to memorize whether the word is ichidan or godan.
Instead of that, memorize an instance, because that way you kill two birds with one stone.
You learn another word and you're using Japanese more organically.
Instead of referring to some list when you
want to use it, you're referring to a piece
of living Japanese that you know.
So, for example, if you want to know whether "deru" – come out – is ichidan or godan,
learn the word "deguchi", which means an exit.
You see it all over Japan on doors: "deguchi"
– exit.
Once you know that this word is "deguchi"
and not "deriguchi", you know that "deru"
is ichidan and not godan.
So, throw away all those lists of ichidan
and godan verbs.
Remember that most verbs are not ambiguous and the few that are, either wait until you
know it organically and naturally or, if you
have to learn it, learn an instance, not a
rule.
Please remember that the course book for this course of lessons is "Unlocking Japanese".
You can get it at Amazon in paperback or Kindle editions.
If you have any comments or questions, please ask them in the comments below and I will
answer.
Thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.