Konnichiwa.
Today we're going to flex our muscles by tackling some real live Japanese.
And I'm happy to announce that we're partnering here with another YouTube channel called *Akasic Tails*.
And they specialize in narrative, and I really like their work, so I'm very happy
that we're able to work together with this Japanese channel to bring you some real Japanese material
that we can break down and apply the principles that we've learned up to now to real situations.
So what we're going to listen to today is a "kaidan" -- a scary story --
and it'll take us a couple of lessons to get through it because I want to break down every sentence
and look at the various problems as we come to them to put you in a position to be able
to do this sort of thing for yourself when you're really listening to real Japanese material.
Right. So let's start by hearing the portion of the story that we're going to listen to today,
and then we'll tackle it bit by bit.
All right. So, the first word here is "sore-wa", and it's rather like saying in English "It was".
And we often begin a story, especially a ghost story, with this kind of expression, don't we?
"It was a dark and stormy night..."
So, you might start by asking, "Why is this 'sore-wa',
which means 'that is' or 'that was' rather than 'it was'?"
Well, it's a very simple reason.
There is no visible word for "it" in Japanese.
The function of what is "it" in English is always in Japanese performed by the zero pronoun.
And it's very important to understand this
because it's one of the fundamental keys to understanding Japanese.
We do have pronouns in Japanese for "me" and "you" and "they" and "she" and "he",
and the zero pronoun is used in the places these would be used in English more often than not,
but there is no word at all in Japanese for the simple neutral pronoun "it".
So, in the cases like this where we actually want to make a topic of what would be "it" in English,
we use the slightly more definite pronoun "that".
So we say "that was". Here we're saying "it was".
Now, we don't know at this stage that it's "it was", and in fact we never learn that directly.
Now, if you want to make sense of this sentence, we can run through it piece by piece
and if we're listening to it without having the words in front of us, we have to do that.
And it's not that difficult to do.
But I'm going to use a shortcut here because when you have the text in front of you you can do that.
I don't think we should work backward the way Rubin-sensei suggests,
even though I'm a great fan of Rubin-sensei in some ways.
But what we can do is take a glimpse at the end because it's going to tell us where
this whole rather complicated-looking sentence is actually going.
So, the end of the sentence -- and we know that the engine of a sentence always comes at the end
and then it may be followed by a couple of sentence-ender particles,
but the engine comes at the end apart from that.
And what comes at the end of this sentence is "hi" -- "day".
Now, when we see a noun ending a sentence like this, we know that this is going to be an "A is B" sentence
and that the copula "da" or "desu", which belongs there to turn it into a sentence, has been dropped.
Now, this happens relatively often in casual speech.
And this is casual speech -- "casual speech" is a bit of a catch-all term, but
this is the kind of language we'll be using perhaps in a sleepover or something
where we're telling "kaidan", where we're telling creepy tales to each other.
And so we're using that level of language where sometimes the copula will get dropped.
And we'll see a few other things being dropped in the course of this story.
So, we have the structure of the sentence here.
"Sore-wa" sets the topic, and that's also going to be the subject, so it's "sore-wa zero-ga".
And then "hi", that's all. "It was... day."
And we don't even know that it "was", because we need the copula on the end to give us the tense.
So if the copula was "da", it would end "datta"; if it were "desu", it would end "deshita".
As it is, we have no tense marker.
But because we know this is setting the scene for a story, we can tell from that fact that
this is an "It was"-type statement, a scene-setting statement.
So what about the rest of this sentence?
"Aru onnanoko-ga senpai-no apaato-de okonawareta nomikai-ni sanka shita."
Now, as you see, between the "sore-wa" and the "hi" comes a complete logical sentence in itself.
And we can see that each clause in this logical sentence, just as we've seen in our videos
on word order and sentence structure, works by successively modifying each element.
So, "aru onnanoko-ga senpai-no apaato-de okonawareta nomikai-ni sanka shita."
*** It's modification mania! ***
So this sentence, again, we can break down into its A-car, which is obviously "onnanoko-ga",
and its engine, which is "shita" -- "did".
And then "sanka shita" -- "'sanka' did'' -- "took part".
And then all the rest of this sentence is successively modifying elements which modify "sanka shita":
"senpai-no apaato-de okonawareta nomikai".
So, "nomikai" is "a drinking party / a drinking meeting".
"Nomi" is the i-stem, the noun form of "nomu" - to drink -
which is put together with "kai" - a meeting or party - to give us "drinking party".
And then everything before that modifies "drinking party".
"Senpai-no apaato-de okonawareta nomikai" -- "a drinking party held in senpai's apartment".
So we have "aru onnanoko-ga" -- "a certain girl" --
"senpai-no apaato-de okonawareta nomikai-ni" --
and this gives us the place where she went to take part.
It was a drinking party held in senpai's apartment.
So we have that whole logical clause:
"a certain girl -- took part in -- a drinking party -- held at -- senpai's apartment"
and all of that is a modifier for "day".
So, "sore-wa..." -- "It was a day when a certain girl attended a drinking party held in senpai's apartment."
So you see this isn't constructed the way we generally expect English to be constructed,
but that's fine because we have some experience now about how Japanese is constructed.
And I think you'll agree this all makes good sense.
So that is setting the scene. It's telling us the day when this happened
and it's filling in details about that day which are going to be relevant as we move into the story.
Well, that took rather longer than I expected for a single sentence,
but I think it's worth going into it in detail, don't you?
So I'm afraid we'll have to leave this on a bit of a shorter cliffhanger than I had originally anticipated,
but the next few sentences I think will contain less questions,
so we should be able to proceed through the text a little bit more quickly next time.
I would also like to apologize for the fact that I looked half-asleep quite a lot of the time in this video.
I wasn't half-asleep. In fact, I don't go half-asleep.
When I'm on my charging bed I'm completely inactive,
and so long as I've got charge I'm 100% functional -- more or less.
What happened was that I was looking at the text rather than the camera rather too much of the time.
If you have any questions or comments, please put those in the Comments below and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons, who make these videos possible,
and all my patrons and supporters, who also make these videos possible, on Patreon and everywhere.
And I'd like to thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.