Hello, pretty peoples. KawaJapa no Kyua Dorii desu. Today we're going to talk
about Japanese homestay and how to use it to improve your Japanese. 
 I believe in immersion. I believe the best way to learn is to immerse yourself in the
language, and I think going to Japan is a
reasonably good way to do Japanese immersion. 
Now, you may be thinking that that is a gross understatement. Surely
going to Japan is *the* way to do Japanese immersion.
Well, it isn't necessarily that simple. It's quite possible to go to Japan and
find yourself trapped in an English language bubble – and once you're in it,
it can be hard to get out of it and then, from a language point of view, you might
as well not have gone to Japan. Whether
you're going for a year or more or just
a week or so, I recommend homestay. If you go to an apartment or a hotel, you will
have a base when you probably won't
use very much Japanese at all. If you
stay in a shared house, which is cheaper than apartments and hotels and about the
same as a reasonably priced homestay...  well, if you go to a shared house where
everyone is Japanese except you, that's great – but you will need a pretty good
level of Japanese to get by. If you go to a shared house where there are foreigners, 
you will almost certainly find that they are talking English all the time. 
Even if the foreigners are French and German and Czech and up to
half the residents are Japanese, those Japanese will be people who are
comfortable with foreigners, and all of them will be talking the common language: English. 
So avoid it like the plague. If you can find a shared house where the
foreigners are Koreans or Chinese, then very likely they *will* use Japanese as
their means of daily communication, but that may be difficult to find. So I think
the best option is homestay, but you must choose the right homestay. How do you do that?
Well, it starts with the first step.
You go to a homestay website and you look at the self introductions by all the
families there. And the first and most obvious tip is this: if someone is saying,
"I want to practice my English" or "I'm very interested in English", cross them
off the list right away. Why? Because if you go to that house and don't
speak English with them, you're not being fair to them, and if you do, you're not
being fair to you. You didn't go to Japan to speak English.
Now, also use a little due diligence and notice if, say, if they mention their children 
and they give them all English-sounding names like Karen – that may not
be their real name, it may be a sort of nickname, but that shows that they are
very very interested in English and it's not an encouraging sign. Conversely, if
you see people whose English is very very poor or looks as if it's been
passed through Google Translate, that's a very good sign. These people are probably
more comfortable speaking Japanese, so if you stay with them they will be getting
what they want, which is some money and interaction with foreigners in a
language that they feel comfortable with, and you will be getting what you want,
which is Japanese interaction. Now, a lot of the families are going to fall
between these two extremes, and a very important tip here is that when you
reply to their listing – and they will list themselves in English almost all the time,
because English is the international language and they want people to be able
to read it – you should reply in Japanese. Why? Well, in the first place if you start
off the relationship in English it can be very difficult to claw it back later
and turn it into Japanese; secondly, you are giving a very strong indication that
the language you are going to be using is Japanese. Now, if they like that, it
will improve their chances of accepting you, and if they don't like it, they will
pass you over and that's what you want them to do. Now, you may not feel
comfortable enough in Japanese to make all the arrangements in that language, 
and if you don't, what I recommend is that you write first in
Japanese and then put an English translation – which gives priority to
Japanese at least. And also if it were me, I would write everything in Japanese and
only translate the most practical parts - like when you're coming, how long you
intend to stay for, how much the cost will be, and things like that.
I would only translate the parts that actually will cause a disaster if they're
misunderstood. All the friendly chatty bits and self-introduction – leave them in
Japanese. Another alternative is to write your reply and post it to one of these
native correction sites like Lang-8 and allow some native speakers to correct it
for you so that you know you've got it all right
before you send it. Now, another consideration is what part of Japan are
you going to go to? To some extent this may be constrained by where you can find
something affordable, but I would consider this: Tokyo is the biggest city
in the world. It has lots of interesting things in it – you might want to go to
Akihabara, for example. There are lots of things you may want to do in Tokyo, but
it's a big city. People are very busy - they often don't have time to interact.
Tokyo is full of foreigners: when I'm out
and about in Tokyo I may see five or six
foreigners in every crowd. In many other parts of Japan, I don't see a foreigner for a week.
This matters because people are geared to dealing with foreigners. 
They may start speaking in English the minute they see your face. The announcements on the
trains and things will be in English as well as Japanese. Once you get out of the
big city, English falls away and you find yourself in a more Japanese environment.
Now, this leads us into other questions about how you immerse in
Japanese once you get there, but that's another topic and I'll deal with that
another time. Next week. I'll be starting my from scratch Japanese lessons and
even if you're not learning Japanese from scratch, I think I'll find them very
useful, because they allow you to review Japanese from the ground up the way it
would be taught if it were taught properly as if it were Japanese. This is
organic Japanese which will help you to think in Japanese and help you with your
immersion. If you want to learn some kanji to get started,
may I recommend my book "Alice in Kanji Land", which teaches all the basic JLPT/N5 kanji
the organic way and as part of an adventure.
Thank you for listening to this little talk.  Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.