Konnichiwa. Today we're going to talk about
one of the most important ways that
we can speed up our learning of Japanese.
And that is by streamlining our vocabulary learning.
Vocabulary is the largest study-type task in Japanese.
Once we've got practically all the structure in place
and we know most of the common kanji,
we still have 1000s & 1000s of words to learn.
We can streamline this partly by knowing
how Japanese words are structured and
having a rational approach to vocabulary
rather than learning every word as a separate task.
And I've done a video on how to do that here.
But there's another thing that's very important which will
streamline and turbocharge our learning of words.
And that is something...
I don't want you to run away when you hear this,
because the way some people advocate this is a very
daunting and unproductive kind of way, I would say,
which is what they call the "monolingual shift",
because what we're talking about here is
having Japanese on the back of your cards.
But we're not doing any kind of monolingual shift here.
We're doing it in a pragmatic way.
And I've done a video on how you can start introducing
Japanese definitions on the back of your cards
in a painless and easy way.
And if you haven't seen that video, I recommend watching it.
But that's not what we're going to talk about here directly.
What we're talking about is how we can use this
to make our learning of Japanese words much more efficient.
We do most of our learning, obviously, through SRS, usually Anki.
And the important thing here is to have some Japanese
on the back of as many cards as you can.
Why is that? Well, for a start,
if you have a Japanese word and you can define it
by another Japanese word that you're learning --
let's take a very simple one: if you're learning the word
"samui" and you already know the word "atsui",
as I said in that video, you can just say "samui"
and have the definition "tai: atsui" --
that's to say, the opposite is "atsui".
And that's a very simple way of defining "samui".
Why is this important? It's not just a question
of starting to think more in Japanese.
It has a very practical value, and that's this:
If you've been reviewing cards for a little while,
you'll probably notice that you look at a word
and you think in your mind what it means
before you turn the card over
and what you very often think of is more or less
the exact words on the other side of the card.
Now, with things like "inu" (dog) and
"mizu" (water) that's pretty obvious,
but in many cases with subtler words
there are various ways they could be defined
but what you remember is the exact words
on the other side of the card.
That's good. It shows that you're learning.
It shows that your SRS is working.
But it's also a waste of bandwidth,
because what you're doing here is learning not only the word
but the associated English words that go with it.
You don't need to learn English.
So, if those words are in Japanese on the other side,
what you're doing is reinforcing the Japanese words.
If you're defining a Japanese word with
another Japanese word that you're still learning,
you're essentially reviewing both of them
at the same time. In some cases,
you may not be learning the other words.
For example, let's suppose you have the word
"reiki", which means chill or cold air, and
you define it "tsumetai kuuki" (cold air).
That means you're going to associate
those words "tsumetai kuuki" with "reiki". Now,
you may know "tsumetai" very well and "kuuki" very well,
in which case you don't really need to reinforce them,
so is that doing any good? Absolutely it is,
because there's a bit of a fallacy in language-learning
communities that learning a word is a simple process:
once you understand that word,
you can look at it for a second or two
and remember what it means, you've learned it.
But that's not the important part of the process.
The important part is getting it really fast.
If you can remember what a word means when
you look at it in two seconds or one second,
guess what? That's far too slow.
When you're hearing it in real life coming at you
in a torrent of other words,
taking one second to remember it is a lot too slow.
By that time a dozen other words have flown past
and you're completely lost.
Even when you're reading, if you have to pause
even fractionally to remember the meaning of
half the words in the sentence, it becomes quite hard
to realize what the whole sentence means
especially when it's a slightly more complicated one.
So, half the process is learning words in the way that
textbooks talk about learning words, but
the other half is getting your speed up the point where
you can draw that word and fire it in a fraction of a second.
You need to have that speed.
So having the words defined in Japanese will help you
increase the number of words you're reviewing
because you're reviewing not only the word on the front
but the words on the back as well,
but it's also getting up your speed,
it's increasing your facility with those words.
Now, another important tip here is... there's something
that when we're at an early stage we tend to dread.
That's when you run into a sentence that has
two, three, four words that you don't understand.
Sentences like that are difficult
but we can actually turn them to our advantage.
What you do is you put each of those words onto its own card
and then on each one you put the same sentence.
Now, I recommend adding sound to these sentences.
So you use TTS
(and I'll put a link in the description below)
you use TTS to turn that sentence into spoken Japanese
and then you have that same sentence
on each card with the word in.
So every time you see a word, what you use to check
whether you understand the word or not
is that sentence. You don't need any other definitions
so long as you understand the sentence.
And that means that every time you run into
one of those two, three or four words
you're reviewing the other one, two and three as well.
And this consolidates all of them a lot faster.
And speed is important.
Not only speed in producing a word or understanding
a word, but also speed in learning it, because we
don't want to spend most of our immersion time in Anki.
We want to keep Anki down to a minimum.
And by multiplying the amount of words
we're drilling in the same space of time,
we're reducing our Anki time or increasing
the amount of vocabulary learning or both.
Now, adding sound to definitions is very important too,
because people often say "Well, maybe
I'll forget the Japanese definition,
then I'll have to go looking that up,
and it's going to slow everything down."
Well, you know, there's actually no harm in
having an English definition so long as
you have your Japanese definition in audio.
The method I recommend is this:
You have the word on the front.
When you flip the card, you listen to it.
You don't look at it at all.
So you'll hear your Japanese definition.
You'll hear the sentence in Japanese if it's a sentence in Japanese.
So long as that confirms that you got the word right,
you don't even have to look at the back of the card.
Just flip over and go on to the next word.
You only look at the back of a card
when there's a problem.
And what this means is that on the back of that card
you can have English definitions, you can
have mnemonics, you can have whatever you like.
But what you'll be doing when you're reviewing the word,
so long as you know it,
is only dealing with the Japanese.
This keeps you in Japanese and it also means that
along with whatever you're reviewing on the front of the card,
you're reviewing whatever is on the back of the card as well.
Even if you don't take too much notice of that,
you're using it to check that you got the front right,
and that's subconsciously getting more Japanese into your blood.
So this is pragmatic use of Japanese-to-Japanese
together with sound which allows you to stay
in Japanese most of the time while you're
reviewing
and to be subconsciously or semiconsciously
or, if you want, consciously reviewing
not only the word on the front of the card
but also the words on the back of the card,
which exponentially increases the value you're getting
for the same amount of review time.
If you have any questions or comments,
please put them in the Comments below
and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons,
my producer-angels, who make these videos possible,
and all my patrons and supporters on Patreon and everywhere.
And I'd like to thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.