Konnichiwa.
Today we're going to talk about Japanese vocabulary.
And we're going to look at some of the problems it presents and how we can overcome many of them.
As we've said before, Japanese is not inherently a difficult language.
It's much simpler and more logical in structure than most languages.
The problem is that, if we're coming from a European language,
in the first place the structure is very different from European structure
and if we try to describe it in terms of European structure, which the textbooks do,
then we're going to become very confused.
It's like trying to describe chess in the terminology of football.  It doesn't work very well.
Kanji certainly take some learning, but they're not as big a barrier as people tend to think.
Actually, the largest barrier is vocabulary.
This is the case in any language.
Acquiring sufficient vocabulary is probably the major task.
Now, in Japanese this is not as easy as it is in European languages, if you're starting out
from a European language, because European languages – Western European languages –
have an awful lot of vocabulary in common.
If you go to a country where you don't know the language at all – such as, say, Italy –
if you don't know any Italian at all you can probably get a general idea of what the
newspaper headlines are talking about, just because of the sheer volume of common European vocabulary.
Words that you may not exactly know, but you know that they're close enough to words you
know in English or French that you have a pretty good idea what they're talking about.
In Japanese, when you start Japanese from the beginning, you have no friends at all
in terms of vocabulary except for words borrowed into Japanese from English
and other European languages.
Now, in absolute terms there are quite a lot of these, but as a percentage of the language they're very small.
But even more than this, Japanese has a lot more words than English or other European languages.
If you look at a comparable dictionary of English and Japanese, the Japanese dictionary
has a lot more words in it.
Now, why is this?
It's again because of the way that we try to treat Japanese as if it were a European language,
so we're applying the European notion
of a word to Japanese.
The fact is that Japanese has words for all kinds of things that English doesn't have
a word for but uses a phrase for.
For example, in Japanese there are words for things like "goods returned to the shop",
" a dog I'm very fond of", "taking a bath".
All of these in English are phrases.
In Japanese there are words for them, generally speaking words made up of two kanji.
Now, a learner of English doesn't have to learn all these phrases.
You may never have heard the expression "goods returned to the shop" or "a dog I'm very fond of",
but if you know the words involved and you know the grammar, you don't actually have to
memorize each of these phrases as a separate thing to learn.
And exactly the same thing is true of Japanese.
Although these expressions are called words and are listed in the dictionary as words,
they're actually somewhere between what we would call a word in English
and what we would call a phrase in English.
And just as with a phrase, we don't necessarily need to know every single one so long as we
know the parts that make it up.
So, let's take the example of "a dog I'm very fond of".
In Japanese this is "aiken".
"Ai" is the kanji for "love"; "ken" is the standard on-reading of the kanji for "inu" – "dog".
So "aiken" means "love dog / dog I love / dog I'm very fond of".
"Aisha": "ai", again, is the kanji for "love"; "sha" is the on-reading of the kanji for "kuruma" – "car".
So, "aisha" is "car I love".
"Shinpin" is "new goods".
"Shin" is the on-reading of the kanji that we find in "atarashii" – "new"; and "hin"
or "pin" is the standard on-reading of "shina" – "goods".
So, "shinpin" means "new goods" as opposed to second-hand goods.
"Shinsha": we have the on-reading of the kanji for "new" again and the on-reading of the kanji for "kuruma".
So "shinsha" is a "new car".
"Henpin": "hen" is the on-reading of the kanji we find in "kaesu" – to "return (something)";
and "pin", again, is the on-reading of "shina" – "goods".
So "henpin" is "returned goods / goods returned to the place they came from, to the shop".
So, you can see the pattern here.
Really what's happening is pretty much the same as what happens in English, once we are
familiar with the on-reading of the kanji concerned, and in most cases they only have
one main on-reading.
In a few of the more widely used ones, they may have two; occasionally they have more,
but we don't need to start looking at some of the long lists of on-readings that we see
in some dictionaries, because most of them are only used in names or only used in a few cases.
Generally speaking, what we need to know is the main on-reading of a particular kanji,
and that's the one we'll be dealing with most of the time.
And the point about this is that we can very quickly learn how to do this on the fly.
For example, some time ago I heard the word "tenmei", which means "the name of a store".
"Ten" is the on-reading of the kanji for "mise" – a "shop, or store";
and "mei" is one of the two main on-readings of "na", the "na " of "namae" – "name",
which is sometimes "mei" and sometimes "myou".
When I heard the expression "tenmei" in context, even though I'd never heard it before,
it was clear to me what it meant.
"Ten" – "shop"; "mei" – "name": "tenmei".
So, "tenmei" is in fact no more difficult than "the name of the shop" in English.
It's made up of those two elements and that kind of combining of two kanji into a phrase-like
word or a word-like phrase is standard Japanese practice.
So, even though Japanese has more words than English, in fact it's not really more difficult
than English and in some ways it's actually easier because this kanji-combining technique
helps to create some of the words that in English would in fact be a completely different word
but in Japanese we can break down the kanji structure in our minds and see what it means.
Now, this doesn't just apply to two-kanji
words.
Sometimes there are more than two kanji and sometimes a two-kanji word can take another
kanji or two more kanji to build it into something more specific.
For example, "kaisui" is "seawater".
"Kai" is the standard on-reading of "umi" – "beach, or sea";
"sui" is the standard on-reading of "mizu" – "water": together, "kaisui" is "seawater".
Now, from here we find words or expressions like "kaisuion".
"Kaisui", as we know, means "seawater", and "on" is the regular on-reading of the kanji
we find in "atatakai" – "warm", and it's that form of "atatakai" which generally means
"something warm" rather than, say "warm weather".
It's the "on" that we find in "onsen" – "hot spring".
So, "kaisuion" is "the warmth of seawater" or "the seawater temperature".
"Kaisuigyo": "gyo" is the on-reading on "sakana" – "fish", so "kaisuigyo" is "seawater fish".
"Kaisuiyoku": "yoku" is the kanji we find in "abiru" – "bathe", so "kaisuiyoku" means "seawater bathing".
And from just the elements we've talked about here we can find various other combinations,
such as "ningyo", which means a "mermaid".
"Nin", one of the two main on-readings of "hito", which is either "jin" or "nin",
so, "ningyo" – "mermaid / person-fish".
"Gyosen": "sen" is the standard on-reading of "fune" – "ship, or boat", so "gyosen" is a "fishing boat".
"Nyuuyoku": "nyuu" is the standard on-reading of the kanji we find in "hairu" – "enter",
so "nyuuyoku" is "take a bath / get in the bath".
"Nyuugaku" is to "enter school"; it usually means to start a new school.
"Nyuuin": "in" means in this case a hospital, it means an institution or originally a temple.
"Nyuuin" means "enter the institution" which in this case is understood to be a "byouin"
– a hospital, an institution for sickness
or sick people.
"Nyuuin" is to "go into the hospital, or to be hospitalized".
So I think we can start to see, even though Japanese appears to have all these specialized
words, the way it works is not actually very different from English.
Once we get used to the kanji and their on-readings, which are usually very limited and manageable
in number, usually just one main one, sometimes two, we're going to get used to seeing them,
and we're going to get used to hearing them, and by a combination of sounds whose meaning
we know, kanji whose meaning we know, and context, we can understand these compounded
words very easily and very regularly.
I think the trick that helps us to do that is to stop thinking of them as words in the
English sense, that's to say, as completely new learning jobs, completely different sound structures
that have a new meaning. They're just as much phrases as they are words, and
when we get used to seeing them that way and hearing them that way, we're in a much better
position to pick up vocabulary smoothly and quickly.
If you have any questions, please put them in the Comments below and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons, my producer-angels, who make these videos possible,
and all my patrons and supporters on Patreon and everywhere.
You can see a list of my red Kokeshi patrons in the information section below.
And I'd like to thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.