Hello, pretty peoples. 
 
KawaJapa no Kyua Dorii desu. I
am Cure Dolly from KawaJapa.
Meri Kurisumasu! Today we're going to
have a short fun lesson about "desu"
and how we pronounce it.
Many people say that the Japanese word "desu"
is pronounced "dess". And "arigatou gozaimasu" 
is pronounced "arigatou gozaimass".
Some people even go so far as to ask
why do we even have the "u"  in the Roman
alphabet spelling when nobody really
says it. Is that true? No, that isn't true at all. When I was
in Japan you would hear people all the
time say "arigatou gozaimasu" with
that "u" very strongly said. How strongly 
the "u" is said in these words
depends on the part of Japan you are in, 
on the particular person who is speaking
and even the same person will pronounce
it quite differently on different
occasions in different sentences and
different combinations of words.
Sometimes you will see in a book
or something a very masculine speaker
ending a sentence with "ssu", and that's short for "desu", so the Japanese perception of
"desu" has the "su" so strongly
incorporated that it can sometimes be
cut down to "ssu" and still be understood – so
the idea that you should write it in
romaji as "dess" is quite wrong.
Do the Japanese ever say this? The answer
to that is I think pretty much "No." They
often say something that sounds to the
English ear like "dess",  but in the
Japanese mind that "u" is always there
because there is no "s" in Japanese. There
is sa, shi, su, se, so – but no "s". So
even if it's very very vestigial,
the Japanese person always
has that "u" in their mind.  So what's my advice on how to pronounce "desu"? Even if you say "dess",
think that "u". It'll make Japanese easier
to hear and it 'll make your pronunciation
sound more natural. Now very soon I – or rather
oneechan no 3D Dolly – will do a more
serious lesson on the so-called Japanese
whispered vowel.
And we'll talk in more depth about how that
really works. For now I would just like
to say thank you so much for supporting
us this year and have a very happy Kurisumasu.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
I am sorry that I can't bow. I have very limited movement. Class dismissed.