Hello, pretty peoples.
KawaJapa no Kyua Dorii desu.
Today we're going to talk about daremo, nanimo, daredemo, nandemo and, in general, about 
these combined uses of "mo".
And this is important not only because it's
useful in itself but because it's going to
show us how these kind of combined "mo" expressions work, and that's useful because there are
quite a lot of them, and the textbooks tend to explain each one as if it were 
a separate learning job.
But if we can understand the underlying principles
we're going to find it a lot easier to learn them all.
So, let's start with "daremo" / "nanimo".
Now, we combine these with a negative, like "nai", to mean "nobody" or "nothing".
So, "daremo inai" – "there's nobody there";
"nanimo nai" – "there's nothing".
Now, that's easy enough, but let's just stop to see what's going on here.
What's that "mo" doing?
Now, as we explained in the lesson on "mo", "mo" is the additive particle, the including particle, 
and it can also be used to mean "as much as".
In, for example, expressions like "ichi jikan mo matta" – "I waited for as much as an hour."
Now, the thing I'd like us to note here is that "as much as" in English can also be said as "even".
Think about how we use "even": "It was six feet, or even seven feet" – that means it
was six feet or as much as seven feet.
"She didn't even smile" – she didn't as
much as smile.
The two expressions are pretty much equivalent in most cases.
The same is true in Japanese.
So "mo", which means "as much as", can also mean "even".
So, we look at "daremo" and "nanimo".
The "dare" here is like "dareka" – "someone" and the "nani" is like "nanika" – "something".
So, when we say "daremo inai", we're saying "not even someone" (no one); 
"nanimo nai" – "not even something" (nothing).
All right, now that's simple enough.
So what about "daredemo" / "nandemo"?
People are sometimes confused because this seems to mean the opposite, and that's mainly
because we don't add a negative to it.
But also, let's look at the "demo" which we 
have instead of "mo".
What is that doing?
Well, we understand the "mo", but what about the "de"?
The "de" here is not the particle de; it is the te-form of "da" or "desu": the copula.
And what does the copula do?
As we learned in the lesson on the copula, 
it is the coupler – "copula" means "coupler"
– and it couples together two nouns.
So what are the nouns here?
Well, this "de" gathers together the whole sentence that comes before it rather like
the nominalizing "no".
So we treat that all as a unit for now, and it's coupling together with another, zero-noun
which we can just call "it".
So, "daremo" doesn't mean "everyone" (that's "minna"), it means "anyone".
So if we say "daremo dekiru" – "anyone can do it" – what we're saying is 
"even if it's anyone, they can do it".
The "even" is that "mo", the "it is" is given to us by the "de".
"Even if it is anyone, they can do it."
Or look at an expression like "nandemo ii".
That means "even if it's anything, it's good", "even if it's anything, it's ok".
And this is often used in quite a dismissive way: "nandemo ii" – "even if it's anything,
it's good", in other words "I don't care / doesn't matter to me" / "whatever".
Similarly, "dou demo ii" – "dou" is "how / in what way" – "doesn't matter, however
/doesn't matter, any way's ok".
It can be quite dismissive.
What we're literally saying is "even if it's any way, it's ok".
So we may notice that "demo" itself, which means "but", works in the same way.
We gather together the sentence before it and then we say "even if that, this",
 "as much as that, this".
For example, "She's pretty, but she's not very clever."
Now, as I say, we're going to encounter this sort of thing in various circumstances.
For example, when I was doing upper beginner/lower intermediate Japanese, I read about this phrase
called "kamoshiremasen", which is quite a mouthful, 
and we're told it means "perhaps / maybe".
And of course it does.
But the way the textbooks teach it, it's just a random set of syllables to memorize and
try to remember that they mean "perhaps".
But in fact there is a logic to it, which I didn't realize until much later, but I should
have been taught right at the beginning.
"Ka-mo-shire-nai" – "ka-mo-shire-masen".
What's this?
"Ka", the question marker, is making a question of the whole of what came before, 
so "the question of that / whether that's the case or not / the question of that" "mo shiremasen".
"Shiremasen", as we should know, is the potential form of "shiru", to know, 
so it means "can't know".
"Shiremasen / shirenai " – "can't know".
So we have "ka", we have "shiremasen" and in between them we have "mo", which means "as much as".
So, "as to that whole question", "ka" bundles the whole thing into a question, 
"mo", "as much as / even", "shiremasen", "can't know":
"As to whether that is true or not, that question,
I can guess, I can suggest, but it's a maybe, it's a perhaps, can't go as far as to know."
So we see that "kamoshiremasen" is not a random set of syllables.
It's made up of three elements that we know already and that make perfect sense when we
understand how they work.
Please remember that the course book for this course of lessons is "Unlocking Japanese".
You can get it at Amazon in Kindle or paperback editions.
If you have any questions or comments, please put them in the comments below 
and I will answer.
Thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.