Konnichiwa.
Today's video may be the most important video I've ever made, from your point of view.
It's about how not to fail in Japanese.
If you are learning Japanese, if you're somewhere between a beginner and intermediate,
your chances of becoming really competent in the language statistically are very low.
Most people who start learning Japanese never become competent.
Now, I've talked a little bit in the past about why that is and we'll recap that briefly today,
but we're going to talk about it from the point of view of what you can do about it,
how you can make sure that you are in the minority who succeed rather than the majority who fail.
Now, as I've noted before, Japanese in this respect contrasts hugely to English.
One fact that illustrates this is the simple fact that
the majority of YouTube channels about learning English are in English.
The majority of YouTube channels about learning Japanese.
are in English
Because English is the language of the Internet, English is the language most people need,
whether it's their native language or not, to participate in the Internet,
to discuss things they may want to discuss, to learn things they may want to learn,
to communicate things to others that they may want to communicate.
So while there are hundreds of thousands of competent non-native English users
all over the Internet using English every day,
there are very few competent non-native Japanese users outside of Japan --
and even inside of Japan, many foreigners get by mostly by using English.
So what do we do about that? How do we make sure that we are not
in the majority who fail to learn Japanese but in the minority who succeed?
Most of the ways of learning Japanese that are promoted online
actually help to keep us in the majority.
And this isn't, obviously, because they're trying to do that.
It's because they haven't found ways of challenging the fundamental problem.
Even the majority of the people who promote immersion as the right way to learn Japanese
-- and they're right, that is the right way to learn Japanese --
tend to adopt a strange perfectionist attitude to the language.
The idea is that you try to make your Japanese very, very good;
you try to get your pronunciation so perfect that nobody could tell you weren't a native speaker;
you try never ever ever to make a mistake because mistakes are just fatal.
Now, this contrasts hugely with English users on the Internet.
Many of the most successful English users on the Internet who are not natives,
on YouTube and elsewhere, their English is not without a foreign accent.
You can tell that they're not native English speakers the minute they open their mouth.
They make mistakes sometimes. They may use strange English sometimes.
Who cares? Do they care? Do you care? Do their fans care?
Nobody cares, because what they're interested in is what they're communicating in English,
not whether their English is terribly, terribly good, because for them, English is not about English.
English is about what they're doing in English.
English isn't an achievement, a competitive sport, a party trick, or art for art's sake.
It's a means of communicating, it's a means of receiving information, of giving information,
of creating, of enjoying, of consuming, content.
And that's the fundamental difference.
If we are spending our time pursuing the essentially unimportant aim of, say,
getting our pitch accent exactly right, all we're doing is delaying fluency.
Now, fluency doesn't mean being completely competent in a language.
Fluency is a stage toward competence.
And what it means is "flowing"; fluency means flowing.
We become fluent when we don't have to think about half the words we're saying,
we can just speak them freely because they're second nature.
And the more we give ourselves to learn about each word,
when as well as remembering its meaning and its pronunciation and its kanji,
we're also trying to remember its pitch accent,
and we're also desperately worried about making even a tiny mistake, because "mistakes are fatal",
then all we're doing is giving ourselves more to worry about, more to learn, and delaying fluency.
Is this the reason that non-native speakers of Japanese have such difficulty
and so few of them become competent?
No, it isn't. In fact, it's the other way around.
It's precisely because Japanese is seen as something we do for its own sake,
as opposed to something we do for the sake of the content,
for the sake of what we're actually doing with Japanese,
that this "art for art's sake" school of Japanese has gained such influence.
It's not the problem, but it's not the solution to the problem and it just makes the problem worse.
So, the problem, fundamentally, is that people need English
and most of what they want to do is in English.
If they want to watch something, it's going to be in English.
It's not usually in Croatian. It's often not even in French.
If they want to discuss things, especially if they're a bit off the mainstream,
somewhere on the Internet, they need English.
English is something they need in order to function in the way they want to function.
Japanese, generally speaking, doesn't apply that pressure, doesn't involve that necessity.
And to learn a language like Japanese, you need either to love it or to need it.
So the thing to start with is taking a look at yourself
and deciding why it is that you are in fact trying to learn Japanese.
What do you want?  What's your dream?  What's your goal?
Your goal may be to speak perfect Tokyo-pitch Japanese so that nobody can tell you from a native.
And if that's the case, well, there's the door.
There are plenty of places that'll teach you about that.
This channel is designed for a particular sort of person.
Now, whatever kind of Japanese learner you are, I think my structure course can help you enormously.
It's going to help you to understand the structure of Japanese,
and everybody needs to know that and nobody else is teaching it.
However, I'm under no illusions. Structure in itself is not going to make you competent at Japanese.
It's just a very, very important tool to help you get there faster, more efficiently and more accurately.
The only thing that's going to make you competent in Japanese is immersion.
That's what these users of English have, because they're using English every day.
They're consuming it, they're producing it, they're discussing things in it.
They're using it and they need it, and that's why they become good at it.
What can we do to level the playing field?
To give Japanese for us the advantages that English has for the average non-native English user?
Now, one thing I've talked about in my main video on immersion, but I want to reiterate this seriously here,
is that we should be ring-fencing areas of our life that are dedicated to Japanese.
So, it might be games, it might be anime, it might be novels, it might be all of those things,
but whatever you've ring-fenced, that is a Japanese-only area.
If you want to play a game and you can't play it in Japanese, then you can't play it.
If you want to watch an anime and you can't watch it in Japanese, then you can't watch  it.
So you have to, you've got that compulsion
that you've got to try and struggle your way into understanding it in Japanese.
Now, some people say, "Well, how much of this do I have to do?
How large an area of my life do I have to ring-fence?"
And this is a bit like asking "How much gas should I put in my car?"
The answer is "How far do you want to go?"
Some people may ask "Well, can I get by without the tank of gas?"
Yes, if you only want to go half the distance, you can.
It's as simple as that. It's an equation.
So, the first thing is to take this ring-fencing seriously.
Now, some people may say, "Well, isn't this a bit artificial?
The non-native learner of English does this because she has no choice.
She can't do the things she wants to do in Croatian.
And in many cases she can't do them even in German.
She has to do them in English.
But we're just making artificial ring-fences here, aren't we?"
And my answer to that is "No, we aren't.
What we're doing is moving from an illusion to reality."
A commenter of mine said a while ago "It's very hard to watch anime in Japanese with Japanese subtitles
because it's difficult, it's slow, and English is only a click away."
We have to get rid of that mentality.
Not in order to artificially ring-fence our Japanese but in order to dispel an illusion.
What does it mean, "English is only a click away"?
Well, of course it's only a click away.
You could click into Wikipedia and read about the anime there.
You could click into a Reddit on that anime and read all the blowing and puffing that various people
who write in English, some of them native, some of them not, are doing about the anime.
Of course, that isn't what my commenter meant.
My commenter meant that the English subtitles are only a click away, but there lies the illusion.
The English subtitles don't give you the anime in English.
They give you an English parody of what the characters said.
If they're speaking at all naturally, if they're using natural English rather than strange Japanesified English,
then they are speaking like natural Americans or whatever.
They're not speaking like the original characters.
Now, depending on how clever the subtitle writer is,
they may be able to come up with a good American version of the character.
But that's an art, it's not a science.
If you see a famous Japanese book translated by three translators,
you'll have three completely different translations.
There can be whole paragraphs that don't have a single English word in common.
Because you can't really translate Japanese into English.
All you can do is try to give a general idea of what's being said.
So no, English is not a click away, if by that you mean you could watch the anime in English.
You couldn't watch the anime in English. If you're content to watch
the English parody of an anime, why are you learning Japanese in the first place?
What is your aim in learning Japanese? What do you want?
But if what you want is to watch the anime as it actually is, there's only one way to do it -- in Japanese.
The ring-fence isn't really artificial.
When we say if you want to watch an anime and you can't do it in Japanese, then you can't do it,
that isn't in fact an artificial ring-fence. It's a reality.
It's just that until you know some Japanese, you don't have the opportunity of seeing the anime at all.
You only have the opportunity of seeing the English parody.
So, once you've got that idea clear in your head, you've started to bring about the psychological conditions
in which Japanese is on a level playing field with English for foreign-language speakers.
You actually need Japanese.
Now, there are other things you can be doing.
You can be moving toward massive reading.
And the Tadoku contest, which I've talked about before, is a very good way of raising your massive reading.
So I'll put a link about that above my head and in the Comments below.
Now, you may be a more extroverted person.
You may want to be interacting with people.
Your main way of interacting with language may be interacting with people.
If so, I've made a video about doing this in virtual reality, which is open to just about everybody.
And in times where social interaction on a physical level is restricted,
this is a wonderful way to get into Japanese interaction.
But the point I want to make here -- I mentioned it briefly in the video, but when we're talking about
leveling the playing field, getting out of the majority who fail into the minority who succeed,
I'm going to reiterate this point again because it's absolutely crucial --
if you make a virtual chat account for learning Japanese, you must be absolutely strict about not using English.
People go in there to learn Japanese and often the first thing they ask in Japanese
when they're speaking to a Japanese person or perhaps a Korean who speaks Japanese
is "Chotto eigo-ga dekimasu ka?" -- "Do you know a bit of English?"
Or someone will talk in English and then they'll just join in just for that little time.
Or they'll go in with a friend and spend half the time talking in English
with an English-speaking friend about talking to people in Japanese.
None of this has anything to do with Japanese immersion.
You need to make an account which is strictly Japanese.
If people are speaking English in the room, leave the room.
If some people are speaking Japanese and some people are speaking English, mute the people speaking English.
If someone addresses you in English, don't reply in English.
Look blank or explain that you don't use English or whatever you want to do,
but for you VR Chat has to be an environment in which Japanese is the only language.
Fortunately, provided you are rigorous about avoiding English-language groups
or half English-language groups, you will in fact find various groups,
not necessarily all Japanese, but groups where the "lingua franca" is Japanese.
Some of them may be Korean, some of them may be Chinese, some of them may be Americans,
but because most of them don't speak English and all of them speak Japanese,
the language of conversation has to be Japanese.
This, essentially, is what happens with non-native speakers of English.
They find themselves in that kind of position all the time.
You have to be a bit more disciplined.
You have to have an iron rule that you are not going to get drawn into the gravitational pull of English.
But if you can do that you can level the playing field.
Now, there are various other strategies that you can use,
some of which you'll probably discover for yourself, some of which I don't even know yet,
but the important thing here is that you can overcome the Japanese problem,
you can level the playing field, you can make Japanese a language in which you become competent,
but you can only do it if you create or recognize environments and situations
in which Japanese is the only language possible.
Now, I can't stress this too much.
It's the sort of thing people are prone to compromise on all the time.
But it's the one thing on which you need to have a no-compromise policy.
If you have any questions or comments,
please put them in the Comments below and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons
and all my patrons and supporters on Patreon and everywhere,
who make these videos and this revolution in Japanese learning possible.
And I'd like to thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.