Konnichiwa.
Today we're going to bust another myth.
Last week we bust some myths about talking Japanese.
This week we're going to look at another one,
which is the idea that Japanese is a tonal language,
kind of like Chinese, or at least partly so,
that we actually need tones (or pitch accent) to make
ourselves understood and to understand what we're hearing.
Now, there are a lot of Japanese enthusiasts on the Internet
who try to persuade people that they need to learn pitch accent
and learn it early on, and I explained in my last video
why I think this is a very bad idea.
I don't accuse these people of deliberately trying
to intimidate and undermine learners,
but in practice this is what happens.
And one of the means they use to try to persuade people
that they have to have pitch accent is this idea
that Japanese is at least partly like Chinese,
a tonal language where getting the pitch right is vital
to understanding and to being understood. And it isn't.
Interestingly enough, these people refute their own claim
themselves in other places, where they tell us proudly
that lots of people who live and work, 
even people who appear regularly on television
in Japan don't have "proper pitch accent"
like the Japanese gods on the Internet.
Well, if that's the case, then the first claim, that pitch accent
is necessary, is already refuted, isn't it?
If these people are functioning and successful in Japan
in communicative professions, then if Japanese were in any way
a tonal language like Chinese, it wouldn't be possible, would it?
Further to this, not only is "proper pitch accent" Tokyo pitch,
and not only does Japanese pitch vary from region to region,
but there are regions that don't have any set pitch pattern at all.
If pitch accent were in any way necessary to understanding,
those regions of Japan would be in trouble, wouldn't they?
And I don't think they are.
Now, it's true that Japanese does have a lot of homophones,
words that are pronounced the same but have different meanings.
And a lot of foreigners, looking at lists of homophones
in a Japanese dictionary, find this terribly intimidating.
Does pitch accent actually help us with this?
And if not, how do we deal with it?
Let's start off by looking at English.
In English, three very short and simple words that we use all the time
-- nobody who speaks English all day goes a day
without using all three of them many times --
"two", the number, "to", the preposition (as in "I went to the park",
"I gave eggs to Sakura", "I want to sleep"), and
"too" meaning excess (too big, too small, too hot &c.) 
are pronounced exactly the same.
And how much trouble does anybody actually have with these?
How many times do they ever confuse one "tu" with another "tu"?
Almost never. Why not?
Because context differentiates them very adequately nearly all the time.
This is why looking at abstract lists of words is not a good guide
to what actually happens when you use them.
Now admittedly, it's a little bit more difficult in Japanese.
For example, "hashi", depending on whether it's pronounced
with a rising pitch or a falling pitch, can mean "bridge" or "chopsticks".
And you can imagine in Japan how difficult it is when you go into
a convenience store and buy some ready-to-eat food
and the "ten'in-san" asks if you want "hashi".
Well, if he doesn't get the pitch accent right or if
you don't know pitch accent, how are you going to know
whether he's offering you chopsticks or a bridge?
If you ask for directions in the street
and you're told to turn left at the "hashi"
and the pitch accent isn't right or you don't know the pitch accent,
how are you going to know if you're supposed to turn right
at the bridge or the chopsticks?
And really this is what it's like pretty much all the time.
It's generally perfectly clear from context what is meant.
We don't very often confuse clouds with spiders or rain with candy.
However, a lot of people will make the point that
in Japanese there are a lot of homophones,
far more than English, far more than most languages,
and there's a reason for this which I'll get to in a minute.
Don't we need some way of distinguishing all these lists of homophones?
And the answer to that is that we actually really don't.
It's like the three "tu"s in English, it's like the chopsticks and the bridge:
we generally know what's going on from context
if we're actually familiar with the words and the language.
But there's something else going on here which is important.
The reason Japanese has such a lot of homophones is partly because
it has a lot more words than English and most other languages.
And the reason for that is that an awful lot of
what get called "words" in Japanese are in fact
what in English would be "phrases", such as
 "a dog I love", "bathing in the sea", etc.
These are "words" in Japanese.
But they're not words in quite the same sense as English words,
because they're made up of two elements, two kanji
with on-readings we'll already know if we're familiar
with the words and enough of the language.
We're not looking at these strange words as
words that we have to learn in the abstract.
We're looking at them as a collection of elements 
that we already know.
They're not exactly like phrases in English,
but they're not like words in English either.
They're somewhere in between the two.
And the way we parse them mentally
is based on their component parts.
Now, I won't go into detail on that because
I've already done it in another video, so I'll put a link to that
above my head and in the information section below.
And I've done several videos on the way that kanji
connect as phrase-like entities and the laws governing
the small sound-changes that they make when they do.
So I'm going to put links to several of those also
in the information section below if you want to follow this up.
The point is that we can't use pitch pattern
to distinguish these phrasal words anyway,
because Japanese has four possible pitch patterns,
not all of which are applicable in any given case, so
if we want to use two, three or four possible pitch patterns
to differentiate a dozen homophones, we're out of luck, aren't we?
It doesn't work that way.
Now, some people have suggested that
even if pitch accent isn't necessary for understanding
or making yourself understood (which clearly it isn't),
it might be helpful in hearing Japanese.
And I don't know the answer to this.
There's no clear evidence on the matter.
I can see that it could be at least to some degree
but I don't know what degree.
It may depend on the individual.
But the point here is that when people talk about,
it's a good idea to gain some basic phonetic awareness,
and that sounds quite reasonable,
it always turns out that what they're actually talking 
about is quite an extensive amount of study.
I've had commenters on my video saying,
"Well, it's only going to take you about three months."
Well, three months is a long time,
and you could do a lot of much more useful things 
in those three months.
So the question is, if it can help you with listening, by how much?
By three months worth? I'm skeptical about that.
People learn all the time to hear spoken Japanese
without any awareness of pitch accent, so it's certainly not necessary.
And if you're having considerable difficulty hearing Japanese,
and many people are in the early stages,
it depends what kind of a learner you are,
but a lot of people have difficulty in hearing.
They're probably also going to have difficulty in learning pitch accent.
It's not necessarily going to help the problem.
This is something you'd have to decide for yourself,
but it seems to me that for a very uncertain and unproven return,
sinking a lot of time into study of pitch accent really is probably a poor risk.
What I'd like to do is what I've done with some other elements of Japanese,
such as the basic laws governing self-move and other-move verbs
(so-called intransitive and transitive verbs)
and the sound-shifts that happen when kanji are combined,
boiling them down into a few basic laws that are easily understood.
Nobody had really done this before I did it.
And perhaps we can do something similar with pitch patterns.
I don't know. I've looked at it.
I haven't come up with anything yet.
But if I do, you'll be the first to know --
provided, of course, you subscribe.
And I'd just like to add that if I do this -- and I don't think
it's that important, it's not high on my list of priorities --
but if I do manage to do this, it won't be in order
to help people get perfect Tokyo pitch, which is
going to be a huge job regardless of anything I do,
and it's not because I think it's in any way necessary or even
particularly helpful towards comprehension or comprehensibility.
It's just because it could have some influence on people's hearing.
And if we could compress it into a small enough package,
so it could be learned, say, in an afternoon,
it might actually be worth trying.
If you have any questions or comments, please
put them in the Comments below and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons
and all my patrons and supporters on Patreon and everywhere.
I appreciate the support and enthusiasm that all of you are giving me
over this project to rationalize Japanese, sweep the myths away,
the myths of conventional Japanese teaching
and the myths of the new, post-modern Japanese enthusiasts.
I don't take sides here.
I'm an equal-opportunity myth-buster.
And thank you all for your support.
And thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.