Konnichiwa.
Today we're going to talk about getting rid of the training wheels.
Being able to jump right into real Japanese, looking up Japanese words in a Japanese dictionary.
And we're going to find it's much easier and less daunting than it seemed.
And we don't have to make this so-called "monolingual transition". It isn't necessary.
We can use English definitions where we need them.
We can use other means of defining words.
But as we gradually make a sensible, pragmatic shift toward Japanese-Japanese definitions,
being able to use a Japanese-to-Japanese dictionary is an important tool to have in our toolbox.
So, let's jump straight in.
The dictionary I recommend is the online Sanseido dictionary.
Now, this is a particularly simple dictionary to use,
which is not my main reason for recommending it but it's a useful side-benefit.
The main reason for recommending it is precisely that it's simple and concise.
And as you know, with the Organic approach, we're not learning words from Anki or dictionaries.
We're learning words from our immersion in the Japanese language.
Dictionaries are just there to introduce us to words, to give us a start.
Anki is just there for pinning them in place between real encounters.
Where we actually learn words is through immersion,
which is the only way you actually get to know the weight and color and implications of a word.
So we want our dictionary not to be three-paragraph, complex explanations.
We want it to give us a simple, straightforward definition, a hook for understanding the word.
That's all we need. So a simple dictionary is exactly what we want.
Now, let's take a look at that simple dictionary.
Here it is.
Now, it's very straightforward. Here's the box where you type your word that you want defined.
And then once you done that and you've got the definition, the only part that matters
is this part here, below and to the right of the box you typed into.
The rest of it isn't important.
This is the definition right here.
And as you see, it divides into two parts.
Above the line is the word, first of all in kana and then in kanji.
Below the line is the definition line
and it's a nice one-line definition.
This is what we're usually going to find.
Occasionally where there's more than one definition,
we may see two or three numbered definitions going downward.
But this is the basic definition,
and as you see, it divides into three parts.
First of all we have something in between angle brackets
and I'll explain that in a moment.
Then we have the definition itself followed by a period.
And then we have another section afterwards with some more information,
and we'll come back to that in a minute.
So, the first thing we're going to look at is
this thing between angle brackets.
What this is is something that tells us what type of word we're dealing with.
There are only a few of these symbols, and I'm going to go through the main ones here.
The first one is "go", "five" in Japanese, and that simply means that it's a godan verb.
Next we may have either the "ue" or the "shita" kanji ("up" or "down")
and either of these means that it's an ichidan verb.
Now, there is a reason why it might be either "ue" or "shita", but it's so unimportant that
I'm going to put it in a pinned comment in the Comments section below.
And you can read it or not depending on whether you're curious as to why that is.
All you need to actually know is that an "up" or "down" kanji means that it's an ichidan verb.
Next we have the kanji which you may know as "katachi", which means shape or form,
and this is in fact an abbreviation of the word "keiyoushi", which means adjective.
So,  "shape or form" means an adjective,
something that tells us the shape or form or color or whatever of a noun.
Now, after this we have the three super-nouns.
As you know, all the words that came into Japanese from Chinese hundreds of years ago
came in as nouns and remain nouns to this day.
So if you want to use them for anything else, we have to do something to them,
which means that there are three fundamental types of super-noun that can do more than
just being a noun even though they are still, in fact, nouns.
Now, if you don't know what I mean, I've made a video on this and I would recommend that you watch it.
This video tells you about the three fundamental super- or extended-nouns.
Each of these three super-nouns has its own symbol.
So, the first of these is a katakana "da", and what that means is that it's an adjectival  noun.
Why do we use "da" to mean an adjectival noun?
After all, most nouns can in fact take the copula "da" under some circumstances.
The reason is that an adjectival noun, provided it's working adjectivally,
can only take "da" -- can't take anything else.
It can't have a logical particle like -ga or -wo or -ni attached to it.
It can't have a non-logical particle like -wa or -mo attached to it.
It can't stand on its own.
It can't do anything except have "da" attached to it.
Now, "da" may be in its simple form or it may be in its connective form, "na".
So, if it's the ending of a sentence, we say "onnanoko-wa kirei da".
If it's working pre-adjectivally, we say "kirei-na onnanoko",
but however we use it it's always got to have that "da" or "na" attached to it.
Occasionally it'll be a fancier form of "da" like "desu" or "de aru", but it can never work without the copula.
And that's why the simplest form of the copula, "da", is the symbol for an adjectival noun.
The next symbol is "suru", again written in katakana, and that obviously designates a suru-noun,
a noun that can be used verbally if we add "suru" to it.
Sometimes the English dictionaries call this a "suru verb", but it's a noun.
It only becomes a verb when "suru" is actually attached to it.
Then we have the kanji here, which is "fuku" and that is short for "fukushi",
which means an adverb, and this means a noun or other word
-- there are a few adverbs that aren't nouns, not many, most of them are nouns --
but it's a word that tells us more about a verb, as the English term suggests, or an adjective.
So a "fukushi" (an adverb) can modify either a verb or an adjective.
And in my video about super-nouns, I talked about these as "foxy" nouns,
because "foxy" was a rather silly pun for "fukushi".
Finally, we have the kanji which you will know from "namae" (name),
and the on-reading here is "mei" and this is an abbreviation of "meishi",
"mei" being an on-reading of "na".
"Meishi" is "a noun".
Now, for most regular nouns you won't actually see this symbol.
Probably because nouns are the most basic and most numerous category of word in Japanese,
a regular noun mostly doesn't get any symbol.
So why do we have this one?
Most of the time when we see it, it's going to be in addition to one of the other super-nouns,
so it's going to be telling us that the noun can function either
as that kind of super-noun or as a regular noun.
Don't worry if this seems a little confusing. We'll go into some examples.
So first of all, let's go back to our original example, which is "souji",
and let's look again at that definition line.
First of all, we have "suru" in angle brackets.
That's telling us that "souji" is a suru-noun.
It means cleaning, the sort of cleaning we do when we clean a house or clean the classroom or something,
and a lot of the time it's going to be used with "suru": "souji suru" (to clean).
So that shows us how the type-marker is working.
It's quite simple, isn't it?
Then we have the definition.
The definition is "yogore-wo nozoite kirei-ni suru koto".
"Yogore" is "dirt"; "nozoku", "remove, get rid of".
So it's "get rid of dirt and make 'kirei'" --
"kirei" in the sense of clean rather than pretty, although perhaps pretty too.
The important thing to notice here is that last word, "koto".
We're going to see "koto" on the end of a lot of definitions.
And if you've followed what I've been saying about the noun-centered nature of Japanese,
I think you'll find it easy to understand why.
The definition tells us what you do when you do "souji" -- "yogore-wo nozoite kirei-ni suru".
But "souji" is not a verb, it's a noun.
So it's "the thing" of getting rid of dirt and making everything clean.
"Koto" indicates the noun-form of doing all that.
And because the word is in fact a noun until you add "suru" to it,
that's the way the dictionary has to define it.
So you'll see this "koto" at the end of a lot of suru-nouns.
And with adjectival nouns and adverbial nouns, you'll often see things like "sama" and "yousu",
meaning the situation, the circumstance, the condition of whatever's being described.
Again, putting the thing into its noun-form, because adverbial nouns and adjectival nouns are still nouns.
So the dictionary describes them in such a way as to indicate the noun-form of what we're talking about.
Now let's look at what's on the other side of the definition itself.
There are usually only three things that it's going to be on this side --
not usually all of them, mostly only one of them.
We're going to have an inverted black triangle, as we have here,
or we're going to have one of two words in brackets.
Here we have two of those things, so let's take a look at them.
The inverted triangle is used some of the time to give us a short phrase or a compound word
in which the word we're defining is commonly used.
So, the wavy line after that triangle stands for the word itself, "souji",
and the next kanji is "ki" meaning a machine. So what we have here is "soujiki",
and it's just telling us that the word "souji" is often used as part of the word "soujiki",
which is a vacuum cleaner or other cleaning machine.
These days it'll very often be "robotto soujiki", a robotic cleaning machine.
We can keep this in our Anki (or not, as we prefer) if we find it useful.
The next part in brackets is "rui" and this means the type or general family of words to which it belongs.
It's the "rui" of "shurui", which means a type or species.
And the "rui" here is "seisou", which means cleaning or tidying,
so it's just telling us the general family and type of words to which "souji" belongs.
We may keep that in our Anki (or not, as we prefer) if we find it useful
or if we want to have that word there as a secondary word that we're starting to get used to,
we can keep it in. Otherwise, just ignore it.
Right, so now let's look at a different word.
This word is "kouun", which means good luck.
As we see at the top, we have "kouun" in kana,
and this word has two possible kanji spellings, so it gives both of them.
If you're adding it to your Anki, it would be best to add
simply the one that you actually encountered in your immersion.
We can deal with the other one later,
but if you want to put it on the back of your card as a note, you can.
But on the front of your card you should have the word you actually encountered in immersion.
Now, between the angle brackets we see that "mei" and "da" are both being used.
So this is what I was talking about before.
"Kouun" can be used as an adjectival noun or it can be just used as a straightforward noun.
We can say "kouun-na koto ni", which in English would probably be translated as
"by a lucky circumstance" or "luckily".
Or it can be used as a straightforward noun: "I had good luck today."
And this is when we're going to see the "mei" designator mostly --
when it's telling us that a noun is not only a regular noun but also a super-noun.
When it's only a regular noun, it tends not to indicate it.
It just leaves us to understand that because it's very straightforward.
And we have the definition here: "un-ga yoi koto".
"Yoi" of course is "ii", so it's saying "un-ga ii".
"Un-ga yoi (luck is good) koto"
Because "kouun" doesn't mean luck is good, it means the thing of luck being good. It's a noun.
And following that, we have something else in brackets.
This is the other kanji that we can have in brackets
and it's the more important one of the two.
This is a very, very useful one.
It's pronounced "tai" and it's short for "taigi" and it means "opposite".
So the opposite of "kouun" is "fuun" (bad luck or no luck) or "hiun" (bad luck, misfortune).
So it's giving us two opposites to "kouun" and sometimes this is very useful.
For example, if we already know one of the opposites it can be better than the definition.
For example, if we were using the word "atsui" and it says "tai: samui", that's all we need.
If we already know that "samui" means cold, then "tai: samui" is a perfect definition of "atsui".
The opposite of cold is hot.
It's also useful for helping us to learn the opposite of a word.
We may not want to actually put the opposite in our Anki,
but if we don't know it already, knowing what the opposite of a word is is very useful.
So this "tai" is something to pay close attention to.
It's also used in cases where it's not strictly an opposite.
For example, "haha" meaning mother has "tai: chichi" meaning father.
Now, a mother isn't the opposite of a father, but she's the kind of other-side counterpart.
And "tai" can be used in that sense as well.
Very, very useful for clarifying and defining words.
So in a short lesson I think we now have a very clear idea of how to use the dictionary,
what the main parts of the definition are and how they work and what they tell us.
The most important thing is that it's all very simple and straightforward. There's not a lot to this.
Once you understand the word types, the three parts of the definition and how they work,
you can use the dictionary.
And all you really need is the word type and the definition.
Those little bits that come after the definition can be useful, particularly the "tai" part can be very useful,
but on the whole you don't have to take any notice of those unless you want to.
Now you're armed to use a Japanese dictionary in the wild.
Good luck and good hunting.
And if you have any questions or comments about this,
please put them in the Comments below and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons, my producer-angels, who make all this possible,
and all my patrons and supporters on Patreon and everywhere.
And I'd like to thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.