Konnichiwa.
Today we're going to talk about Japanese punctuation.
Now, the first thing we need to know about
about Japanese punctuation
is that most of it is a relatively late 
arrival in Japanese.
Most of it came in during the Meiji era, 
about a hundred and fifty years ago.
This was when Japan was modernizing, 
and a lot of the reason it came in 
was to help in translating Western literature.
Now, what this means is that in most cases
Japanese punctuation doesn't have
such fixed and structural meanings as the 
equivalent punctuation does in English 
and other European languages.
So, we need to know what the punctuation is
doing and also what it isn't doing.
So, the first mark we're going to look at
is the Japanese full stop or "maru",
which looks like a little circle at the foot 
of a letter.
And this is really the exception to the rule,
because it really is structurally clear.
What it does is end a sentence.
And this is very important for us in understanding
how complex Japanese sentences are structured.
Why is that?  Well, Japanese is a very 
modification-heavy language.
That's to say, a lot of what other languages do by 
other strategies, Japanese does by modification,
that's to say, using clauses to modify nouns
or other elements of a sentence.
Most of the heavy lifting in Japanese structure
that's not done by logical particles
is done by this modification structure.
So whole logical clauses can be used 
not as logical clauses  
but in order to modify a noun or some   
other element. 
So, let's take a look at how this works.
"Ichiba-de katte kawa-ni otoshichatta okashi."
And this means "The candy that I bought at
the market and done dropped in the river".
Now, the problem with this when we're reading a
complex sentence is that we can get confused
about whether something is a logical clause
or not.
So, are we saying here that I bought something
at the market? No, we're not saying that.
Are we saying that I dropped something in
the river?
No, that's not what we're saying in this sentence.
Both of those things are just modifying "okashi".
They're telling us what kind of an "okashi" 
 it was: 
the one I bought at the market and done
dropped in the river. 
So all we have here is a single noun, "okashi",
that's been heavily modified by logical clauses
that aren't working as complete logical clauses.
We can then add a logical particle to that
"okashi" and make it into a whole logical clause.
So, we might say, "Ichiba-de katte kawa-ni
otoshichatta okashi-ga sakana-san-ni taberareta."
(The candy I bought at the market and done
dropped in the river got eaten by a fish.)
But how do we ensure when we're reading a 
sentence like this whether we're looking at
a logical clause or whether we're looking
at a modifier?
Now, the important thing to understand here
is that in any kind of Japanese writing (except
perhaps on Twitter or something) a logical
clause has to end in one of two ways, 
either with a "maru", which tells us that 
it's the end of the complete sentence -- 
it may have a couple of sentence ender particles 
after it, but it's a very strict rule of Japanese
that what ends any logical clause is the B-engine,
aside from any sentence-ender particles --
or it has to end in a clause connector that completes
the clause and leads into the next clause.
This may be the te-form, it may be a word
like "kara" or "keredo", 
but armed with that information we can 
then see what's going on.
So, let's look at "Ichiba-de katte kawa-ni
otoshichatta". 
That's a complete pair of logical clauses.
It's not telling us what it was that we bought
in the market and dropped in the river,
but it could perhaps be presuming that.
But we know that it's not in fact a 
logical clause 
because it doesn't end in a clause connector 
and it doesn't end with a "maru".
It goes straight into a noun.
And this is how we can tell the difference
between a modifier and a logical clause.
And we know when the entire sequence,
the entire sentence, 
is over because it's going to have
that "maru".
And I've done a video about this method of
analyzing Japanese sentences 
and I'll link that so that you can follow it 
 up afterwards.
But the "maru" here is vital.
Now, the next one we're going to look at 
 is the Japanese comma, 
which looks like a little diagonal line
at the foot of a letter.
And that's kind of the opposite of a "maru",
because it really is not a logical element
 in the sentence.
It was adopted into Japanese, but unlike the
English comma or other European commas,
it has no logical rules. Ideas like sectioning 
off a subordinate clause with commas
at each end, that doesn't exist in
Japanese.
You just put in a comma wherever you want
to indicate a pause. And that's all it does.
In Japanese schools, students are discouraged
from using too many commas, 
and the reason for this is not incorrect 
comma usage, 
because there is no such thing as incorrect 
comma usage in Japanese.
The reason is that commas are not a structural
part of Japanese, so students are discouraged
from using them as a crutch in conveying their
meaning.
If you can't convey your meaning without commas,
then you're not writing good Japanese.
Now, the next one we'll look at is the question
mark or "hatena".
Now, in English the question mark is subject
to a rule.
If you have a question, you have to end it
with a question mark.
And also in English, questions are structurally
different from statements.
So if we say, "The coffee is hot", 
that's a statement,  
but if we say,  "Is the coffee hot?" 
 that's a question.
In Japanese we don't have this differentiation.
Statements and questions are structured exactly
the same. Now, in formal Japanese we have
the question-marking particle "ka", which
tells us that it's a question.
But in informal Japanese we can use "ka" 
but mostly we don't.
Sometimes we use the question-marker "no",
but that's ambiguous because 
"no" can also be a statement marker.
The only way you can really tell a question
from a statement in Japanese 
is the rising intonation, which of course 
you can't hear in text.
And so the question mark has become a very
useful tool for indicating that rising intonation,
for telling us that this is a question, not
a statement.
In English, you have to use the question mark
at the end of a question 
if you're writing proper English. 
In Japanese, there's no such rule.
If the "ka" marker is there, you don't use
the question mark,
but if you want to disambiguate the fact 
that something is a question 
rather than a statement, you just pop in 
a question mark if you want to.
The next thing we'll look at is quotation
marks.
These look like little square brackets at
the ends of a statement, 
and they work exactly the same as 
English quotation marks.
They just tell us that something is a quotation:
it's what somebody's saying.
We don't use them for what somebody's 
thinking, as we sometimes do in English.
Now, sometimes you'll see double quotation
marks like this,
and what they do is mark a quotation 
that occurs inside another quotation.
Now, the last thing I want to talk about is 
something that really puzzles people quite a lot.
In Japanese, particularly Japanese books,
you'll sometimes see, 
especially in vertical text, a set of little marks 
that look a bit like Japanese commas, 
running along the left-hand side of a word 
or a phrase. What on earth is this doing?
Nobody seems to tell you.
What it is actually doing is either emphasizing
that word or phrase  
or telling us that it's being used in 
a special sense. 
So what these little marks are really 
doing is something like 
putting something into italics in English.
And I suspect they came into Japanese 
in the first place to render italicization 
when translating Western literature.
There's no way of really writing Japanese
characters in italics.
There is no italic format for Japanese, so
this is what's used instead.
This emphasis and the indication that something's
being used in a special sense 
can also be indicated by katakana, but 
you will see this from time to time 
in Japanese texts and that's what it means.
If you have any questions or comments, 
please put them in the Comments below 
and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons,
my producer-angels, who make these videos
possible, and all my patrons and supporters
on Patreon and everywhere.
My Red Kokeshi, my Blue Kokeshi, my Pink Kokeshi:
every one of you is valuable to me,
and so are all of you who comment and like 
my videos or just come here to watch them.
Thank you, all of you, for helping us to make
Japanese as simple as it really is.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.