Hello, pretty peoples.
KawaJapa no Kyua Dorii desu.
I am Cure Dolly from KawaJapa.
Today we are going to talk about Japanese
conjugation.
Which particular conjugation? you may ask.
Well, all of them.
Except for the ta and te form, which we will
discuss in a different video.
Why are we dealing with them all at once?
Because we can.
Because Japanese conjugation all works the same way.
It's very simple, very logical and very consistent, and very very easy to understand.
However, when we look in the textbook, we
get the impression of lots of different rules
and forms that you have to learn for each
particular conjugation.
Why is that?
Why do the textbooks make it seem so complicated when it's actually so very simple?
Two reasons.
The first is that they insist on this European
concept of conjugation.
Actually, what we are doing is not conjugation at all.
What we are doing all the time is attaching
a simple helper verb – or helper adjective
or helper noun – to the stems of the verb.
And once we see how that works, it becomes very, very simple and easy to understand.
The other problem is that they spend a lot
of time explaining the changes that take place
in terms of the Roman sound system – the
alphabet.
But in fact that causes a lot of confusion
and difficulty.
Once we see it in the terms it actually exists in, that is to say, the *Japanese* sound
system, it all becomes very logical.
I would say it is a 100% consistent, logical
and simple – except there is one exception
in the whole system, and there are two irregular verbs, so perhaps we had better say 99.9%
logical, consistent and easy to understand.
All right.
So, let's give you the master chart, which
will show you how all of this works.
Chaato wo kudasai!
So, here is the familiar Japanese kana chart, with all the sounds of Japanese.
I've turned it on its side, for reasons which
will become apparent shortly.
All Japanese verbs end with one of the kana in the middle row – it looks like a column
because I've turned it on its side.
That is the u-row – u, ku, su, tsu, nu etc.
However, there is no verb ending in yu, so
we can get rid of these two columns and simplify
the chart.
Actually, there is only one verb that ends
in nu – that's shinu, to die – so we
could get rid of that too and make it look
even simpler, but I'm keeping it in for completeness.
So, every verb ends with one of the kana in
the red box.
Let's have an example of each of the possible
endings: kau, buy; kiku, hear; hanasu, speak;
motsu, hold; shinu, die; tobu, fly; nomu,
drink; toru, take.
Now, as you can see, there are four other
possible endings that the verbs could have,
and in fact each of those endings is used.
And when we use one of the other endings,
the verb stops being a verb and becomes what
I call a 'sticky stem', that is, a stem to
which we stick something else.
So, here is the i-stem.
With the i-sticky stem, we change the u-row
kana to the corresponding i-row kana.
So, kau becomes kai, kiku becomes kiki, hanasu
becomes hanashi, and so forth.
What do we do with the 'i' row sticky stem?
Well, the thing that you have all seen, I'm
sure, is we can attach the helper verb masu
to the i-row sticky stem.
Masu is not a conjugation.
It is a verb.
It is a helper verb and it attaches to the
i-row sticky stem.
It does not change the meaning of the verb,
but it makes it formal.
So, kau is the regular, informal version,
meaning buy; kaimasu is the formal version.
Kiku is the informal version, hear; kikimasu
is the formal version.
What else do we do with the i-row sticky stem?
Well, we can attach the helper adjective tai.
Tai is a helper adjective which means want.
So, kaitai means want to buy; kikitai, want
to hear; hanashitai, want to speak, and so
forth.
We also use the i-row sticky stem for attaching nouns in order to convert a verb into a
new noun.
So, kaimono, that is buy-thing: it means shopping.
Nomimono, drink-thing, means a drink.
Hanashikata (kata means form or shape)...
Hanashikata means form of speaking, manner
of speaking.
So now we know how to attach all these except
for what are call "ru-verbs", the ichidan
verbs, and they are very very simple, because
all you ever do with these, ever, is simply
cut off the ru and you have *all* the possible
sticky stems of the ichidan verbs.
So taberu become tabe; tabemasu is the formal
form of the verb; tabetai, want to eat; tabemono,
eat-thing, food.
So now we come to the a-row sticky stem, and
this has one exception.
And you'll say, "Ah, languages!
Full of exceptions!"
This is the only exception in the whole system,
and it's a very natural one that you can well
understand.
The u-ending verb does not become ka-a, it
becomes ka-wa, which is a lot easier to say,
and understand in conversation, isn't it?
So kau does not become kaanai, it becomes
kawanai.
So what do we use the a-ending stem for?
I've already mentioned it – probably the
most common use is to attach the helper adjective
nai to the sticky stem of a verb.
It attaches to the a-sticky stem, so kau,
buy, becomes kawanai, not buy; kiku, hear,
becomes kikanai, not hear; hanasu becomes
hanasanai, not speak, and so forth.
Very simple.
We also use the a-sticky stem for the causative
and the so-called passive forms of verbs,
and these "conjugations" often give beginners
quite a lot of trouble.
And I have made videos that show how simple
they really are, how they work, what they
mean, and how simple it really is if you understand
them the way they actually are.
Today we are just going to look at the structure.
So, the causative form of a verb, which means
to allow someone to do something or make someone
do something, is formed by attaching the helper
verb seru / saseru to the a-row sticky stem.
Now, I say seru / saseru – what does that
mean?
Well, it means that there are actually two
forms of this helper verb.
Seru attaches to all those sticky stems that
we're working with – all the ones that change.
And saseru attaches to the ichidan – the
so-called "ru-verb" – sticky stem.
Where there is a slight variation in the helper
verb, we always find that the longer version
goes onto the ichidan verb, because that verb
is generally shorter.
The ichidan verb, we take off the whole last
syllable; with the godan verbs, the changing
sticky stems, we don't take off the last syllable,
we change it to a different sound.
So, seru / saseru makes the causative form
of a verb.
Kau becomes kawaseru, allow to buy, make to
buy; hanasu becomes hanasaseru, allow to speak,
make to speak; nomu, become nomaseru, allow
to drink, make to drink; and taberu becomes
tabesaseru, allow to eat, make to eat.
The so-called passive – which isn't really
passive, and we have a video helping you with
understanding what it really does and how
simple that really is – the so-called passive,
the receptive form, is formed with the helper
verb reru / rareru.
So, kau become kawareru, which means get bought,
be bought, get bought – get bought is better
because that is closer to what the Japanese
really means, and you will understand that
when you see the video; kiku becomes kikareru,
get heard; nomu becomes nomareru, get drunk
– I don't mean become intoxicated, I mean
the way the cup of coffee got drunk; taberu
becomes taberareru, get eaten.
So as you see, there are really – apart
from that one exception, there are not lots
and lots of different ways of attaching these
together.
It's because it's presented as a conjugation
and because it's explained as if it was written
in Roman letters that the confusion arises.
We can see that it's actually very, very regular.
We just shift to the a-row and add the helper
adjective nai, the helper verb reru / rareru,
the helper verb seru / saseru, and it's just
as simple as that.
Now we come to the e-row sticky stem.
Just like the others, it's perfectly consistent.
You just change the u-row kana into the corresponding
e-row kana.
So kau becomes kae, kiku becomes kike, hanasu
becomes hanase, and so forth.
We use the e-row sticky stem to create the
potential form of verbs, which means you can
do the verb.
The helper verb, which is stuck onto the e-row
sticky stem, is ru / rareru.
And yes, even though it's simply ru, just
that one character, it is a helper verb – if
you look it up in a Japanese dictionary (not
a Japanese-English dictionary, but a real
Japanese dictionary) you will find ru there
as a jodoushi, a helper verb – and it has
these two forms, ru and rareru.
Rareru is, you will have noticed, the same
as the so-called passive, reru / rareru, so
the ichidan form of the passive and the potential
are the same – but because they are used
very differently, there are very very few
occasions on which you would confuse the two,
so it's not really a problem.
So, we have kaeru, can buy; kikeru, can hear;
hanaseru, can speak, and so forth; plus taberareru,
can eat.
So, now we come the last sticky stem, the
o-row sticky stem, and just as with the others,
it's perfectly consistent.
Kau becomes kao; kiku become kiko; hanasu
becomes hanaso.
And what we do with this sticky stem is attach
u, and, as you know, u when attached to o
generally lengthens the o.
So kau doesn't become kao-u, it becomes kaou;
kiku becomes kikou; hanasu becomes hanasou.
The volitional has a number of uses, and I'm
only talking about structure here, so I'll
just use one of the uses.
Kau become kaou, let's buy; kiku become kikou,
let's listen, let's hear; hanasu becomes hanasou,
let's talk.
In the ichidan form, we add you to the end
of the ichidan sticky stem.
So taberu becomes tabeyou, let's eat.
One peculiarity of the volitional form is
that you can also make it by changing the
form of masu to use the volitional in its
formal mode.
And when you do this, you say mashou instead
of masu, and when you do this, naturally enough
you use the i-row sticky stem, just as you
do with the regular masu.
So, ikimashou, let's go.
So now you have the master keys to nearly
the whole of the Japanese so-called conjugation
system, and as you now know, it's not conjugation
at all.
The only thing we haven't covered is the ta
and te forms of verbs, which perhaps are closer
to being conjugations, and fortunately ta
and te work identically, so once you know
one, you know the other.
And we will cover that in a future video.
You may not be able to swallow everything
in this video in one gulp, but every time
you become confused about the way any "conjugation"
is working, please come back to this video
and run it through, and I think it all will
become perfectly clear.
Some people will ask, well, what about irregular
verbs – remember all those pages and pages
of irregular verbs in the back of the French
textbook, or the German textbook, or the Spanish
textbook?
Well yes, Japanese has irregular verbs too.
There are two of them.
That's right, just two.
Suru and kuru.
And they work a little bit differently from
the others, and you'll very soon pick that
up.
Remember that the textbook for this course
of lessons is "Unlocking Japanese", and you
can get it at Amazon in paperback or Kindle
editions.
Thank you for attending this class.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegaishimasu.
Class dismissed.