Konnichiwa. Today we're going to talk about
on- and kun-readings in Japanese.
Now, I imagine you will know already broadly what these are.
But the way they get explained often leaves people with
the impression that they are exotic and Japanese things
that have no relation to anything we know from English
and this "exotic" view of them can leave us
not knowing how to handle them.
It can even leave people with strange ideas like
memorizing all the on-reading for the kanji.
And it also leaves us unable to make use of
the very considerable strategic advantages
of Japanese on-readings.
Now, if you speak English,
and if you're watching this video I imagine you do,
far from Japanese on-readings being something
very exotic, you have a very considerable advantage
in understanding what they are.
Because in this particular respect
there's a close analogy between Japanese and English.
England and Japan are two islands beyond the limits
of the great world island, the Eurasian continent.
And just as English people have never really considered themselves part of Europe,
so Japanese people have never really considered themselves part of Asia.
At the same time, and particularly at certain periods
in their history, England has been deeply influenced by
the classical culture of the European continent and its language.
And Japanese has been deeply influenced by
the classical culture of East Asia,
that's the Chinese culture, and its language, Chinese.
As we know, the Japanese writing system is
based on Chinese, just as the English writing system is
based on the Roman letters.
And also both languages have what we might call
on- and kun-elements.
The kun-elements are the native elements
and the on-elements are those that come from
the continental classical language.
Now English, as you've probably noticed, doesn't have kanji.
If it did have kanji,
this kanji's kun-reading would be "look" or "see".
Its main on-reading would be "vis".
And when we use it in everyday life, we generally
just say "Look at this" or "Did you see that?"
But when we incorporate it into a larger concept word
we tend to use the on-element "vis".
So we talk about "vision" or "visible" or "invisible".
In Japanese, the kun-reading, as we know,
is the "mi-" of "miru" and the on-reading is "ken".
And in simple usage we tend to say "miru":
"Mite, mite! / Sore wo mita" -- "Look at that! / I saw that" &c.
But in more compounded and complex uses
we talk about "kenbutsu" -- "the seeing-thing",
looking, viewing, sightseeing;
"kenkai" -- "an opinion", that's to say, a point of view
or way of seeing things, &c.
The kun-reading of this kanji would be "hand"
and the main on-reading would be "man",
as in "manual", which can mean doing something
by hand or it can mean a handbook.
"Management" and "manipulation" also come from
this on-element of "hand".
In Japanese it's "te", as you know,
and the on-reading is "shu",
which we get in things like "shudou",
which again means "manual" as opposed to automatic.
"Senshu" -- that's an athlete --
which means a chosen athlete;
an athlete is here being referred to as a "hand",
just as in English we sometimes refer to
people doing something as "hands".
The kun-reading of this kanji would be "dog"
and the on-reading would be "ken" or "can".
So if we're talking about a dog we say
"There's a dog" or "I have a dog." We just say "dog".
But in more compound and complex uses we may say
"kennel", the place where a dog lives,
or "canine" (or "canine" in the vowel-shifted version)
-- "doglike" or "in the nature of dog".
In Japanese the kun-reading, of course, is "inu"
and the on-reading is similar to English -- it's "ken".
And we get this in "kensha", a doghouse or kennel, and
also in expressions like "aiken" -- "dog I love/loved dog"/
"pet dog" -- "ai" meaning "love", "ken" meaning "dog".
And this really leads us into the main difference
between Japanese and English on-reading.
In English we tend to use on-elements in slightly more technical contexts,
for example, "tele", which means "far", we wouldn't
usually use it to just mean something that's far away.
We use it in technical contexts like "telescope",
"telephone", "television", "teleportation" etc.
However, Japanese is more likely to use on-readings in regular expressions,
often when it combines two words even in
quite everyday contexts, it will use the on-reading.
Not inevitably, but very often.
So we have words like "kaisou".
"Kaisou" means "seaweed".
Now, in English we use the kun-reading for both elements:
we say "sea", which is a kun-reading,
and "weed", which is a kun-reading.
In Japanese we use the on-reading for both elements.
So we say "kai", which is the on-reading of "umi", sea,
and "sou", which is the on-reading of "kusa", grass.
And this is probably the largest single difference
between the way on-elements are used in Japanese
and the way they're used in English.
And it's an important one to understand,
because it can mislead us into thinking that
a lot of "words" that are in fact phrases in Japanese
are words that we have to learn.
To take this particular example, if you're learning English
and you know the word "sea" and you know
the word "weed", you may very well not think
that you have to put "seaweed" into your Anki
or whatever you're using to learn English words
(assuming you're using anything of that sort)
because the combination is pretty obvious.
In Japanese, because the on-readings are being used,
the tendency is -- and most books and
Japanese learning websites encourage this tendency --
is to think "Ah, here's a completely new word called "kaisou",
so I've got to learn that."
But the truth is that if you become used to
the on-readings of words,
-- which you should do by not learning kanji --
the important thing here, just as in English for example
when you were learning the word "book"
you wouldn't also learn the on-elements "bibl" and "libr",
so that as well as learning "book" you were learning
the elements you were going to get in "bibliography"
and "library" and so forth.
You wouldn't do that.
You'd learn "book" at a fairly early stage and later on
you'd come across words like "library" and "bibliography"
and learn them as you come to them.
And that's exactly what you should do with kanji.
Learn words, not kanji.
Learn kanji as part of words, when you come to them.
And I've done a video on this
if you want to go deeper into it.
Now, if we do this, what we find is that
kanji become our friends.
We're not trying to learn lists of on-readings of kanji.
What we do in English is we learn usually
the kun-reading first because that's going
to be on the whole the simplest word.
Not in all cases, but in most cases.
And then later we'll come upon the on-readings.
In Japanese, what makes that easier is that
if we've already learned the kanji from the kun-reading
we have this extra hook of the kanji,
which makes things much clearer.
And since we can see that these are actually the same word,
that "kai" is "umi" and "sou" is "kusa",
just as in English if we know the word "sea" and we know the word "weed"
we may not feel that we have to make a special job of learning "seaweed",
so in Japanese if we know "kai" ("umi") and "sou" ("kusa")
we may not have to make a special job of learning
"kaisou" -- "sea-grass" or "seaweed".
Also, in many cases we're going to have a lot of help
in knowing what the on-readings are
if we use the Sound Sisters method.
Because lots and lots of kanji have a particular element
embedded into them which tells us
how they're pronounced.
Now, this pronunciation of course
refers only to the on-reading,
because the kanji came from China
so that's where the sound elements were put into them
and they relate to the Chinese pronunciation.
So those all-important on-readings which are
going to be used in all kinds of technical words
but also in everyday phrases like "the dog I love" or
"seaweed" or "pirate" or "getting into the bath"
or all kinds of other combinations.
And I've talked about this principle in my video on
how to learn Japanese vocabulary much more easily.
All this gives us a well-rounded system,
in which we learn on-readings as we come to them,
not as part of lists; we learn them as words;
we learn kanji as part of words;
and we understand the sounds of a wide range of those
on-readings and on-phrases from the Sound Sisters.
All this hangs on knowing what on-readings really are,
understanding how they actually work in the Japanese language.
And that is much easier when we understand,
as we do understand now, how on-readings
are not some strange thing specific to Japanese.
They're something very similar to what we have in English.
The only difference is that in English
we don't have the kanji to help us.
And so long as we don't try to learn kanji as abstractions,
but learn them as words,
the fact that kanji exist is going to be our ally
and our friend rather than our enemy.
If you have any questions or comments,
please put them in the Comments below
and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons,
my producer-angels, who make these videos possible,
and all my patrons and supporters on Patreon and everywhere.
And I'd like to thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.