 
Hello, pretty peoples.
KawaJapa no Kyua Dorii desu.
I am Cure Dolly from KawaJapa.
Today we are going to talk about the two forms of Japanese adjective.
This is something that the textbooks don't
really tend to explain, exactly what's going
on here.
They tell you what to do, but they don't tell
you why you are doing it.
And this is terribly important, because if
you don't know WHY you are doing what you're
doing, if you don't know how they really work, you feel like you're memorizing a lot of random,
unconnected rules, and it makes it very difficult to use them instinctively.
Why don't the textbooks explain what's going on?
I think it's because they don't want to overload you with a lot of extra information.
They just tell you what to do, and you memorize it and get on with it.
But that's a little bit like not giving a shopper a shopping bag because it would be something extra
to carry.
Yes, it something extra to carry, but it is
the thing that makes everything else easier
to carry.
So, let's look at the shopping bag. Let's
look at how i- and na-adjectives really work.
We're going to look at four fundamental facts
about i- and na-adjectives.
Fact 1: Na-adjectives are essentially nouns.
They work exactly like nouns and that is why they need "na" – and I'll explain that in
just a moment.
It's really very simple, and once you know
it it makes the whole thing much simpler.
Fact 2: I-adjectives are very close cousins
to verbs.
They change their form the way verbs do.
They do what the textbooks call conjugation, although it isn't really conjugation.
They have their own te-form.
Na-adjectives don't change at all, because
nouns don't.
Fact 3 - and this is really very, very, very
important: I-adjectives have the da/desu function
built into them.
That is to say, the equals sign built into
them.
Let me show you what I mean.
A problem here for most learners is that
from the very first lesson you get taught
something that confuses this important fact.
You learn something like: "hana ga kirei desu" / "hana ga akai desu".
Now, "kirei" is a na-adjective and "akai"
is an i-adjective, and the two sentences are
structurally identical, aren't they? So don't
i-adjectives and na-adjectives work identically?
No, they don't.
And that is because in "hana ga kirei desu" the "desu" is necessary.
It is a vital part of the grammar of that
sentence.
But in "hana ga akai desu", the "desu" is
NOT grammatically necessary.
It doesn't serve any grammatical function.
It's only there to make the sentence formal, to make it "polite" as the textbooks say.
And this is one of the reasons why I think
it is a very bad idea to teach desu/masu Japanese
– formal Japanese – first, because students end up thinking that this is plain Japanese, and
it isn't.
If we put our sentences into plain Japanese, we can see what's really happening.
"Hana ga kirei da"/ "hana ga akai."
This is correct, plain Japanese.
You have to say "hana ga kirei da" because that "da" is the equals sign that connects
"kirei" to "hana".
You can't say "hana ga akai da" because the "da", or the equals function, is already built
into "akai", as it is into all i-adjectives.
Not only don't you need the "da", but you
can't have it.
If you say "hana ga akai da", it's like saying
"flower is red is" – the "is" is already
there.
You don't need the "da"; you can't have the
"da".
So, I think we're already a little bit clearer
on what's going on.
But what happens when we turn the description around the other way?
"Akai hana"– red flower / "kirei na hana"
– pretty flower.
What is that "na" there on the na-adjective?
This is the other thing that you don't get
told and you really need to know.
Fact 4: "Na" is "da".
You always need to have an equals sign, a
"da" or "desu", with a so-called na-adjective,
and in its connective form "da" is "na".
So when you say "kirei na hana", what you're actually saying is "kirei-da hana" – in
other words, "is-pretty flower".
In "akai hana", you're already saying "is-red
flower" because "akai" doesn't mean "red",
it means "is-red".
There is a word for "red" in Japanese, and
that's "aka".
When we add "i" to it and turn it into an
i-adjective, it already has the is-function
built into it.
Another way of looking at it is that that
"i" we put onto "aka" serves the same function
as the "da" or "na" on a na-adjective.
And you might be saying "Why didn't anyone ever tell me that "na" is "da"?"
I asked that question myself.
Everything makes much more sense when you know that, doesn't it?
All right.
Now, there's another hidden "da" that we need to know about, and that arises when we put
two adjectives together.
First of all, let's look at what we do with
i-adjectives.
It's very straightforward.
If we want to say "small and cute" (small
is "chiisai", cute is "kawaii"), we turn the
first one into the te-form, the joining form,
the conjunctive form, so we say "chiisakute
kawaii".
The te-form of an i-adjective is formed by
cutting off the "i" and putting "-kute" on
the end of it: "chiisakute kawaii".
Very simple.
If we want to connect two na-adjectives, say "kirei da " and "yuumei da" ("is-pretty" and
"is-famous"), what do we do?
Well, we do exactly the same thing that we did with the i-adjective.
Now, you might say, "But na-adjectives are
in fact nouns and you can't change the ending
of a noun, you can't put it in te-form."
No, you can't.
But you can put "da" or "na" or "desu", or
whatever you call it, into te-form.
And its te-form is simply "de".
The te-form of "da" or "na" is "de".
So, we say "kirei de yuumei da".
As you see, we've done precisely what we did with the i-adjective.
"Chiisai" means "is-small" and we put that
into te-form: "chiisakute".
"Kirei da" means "is-pretty" and we put that into te-form: "kirei de".
The te-form of "da" is "de".
You know, I spent probably a month wondering why the de-particle was used in this strange
way to connect na-adjectives.
But of course this isn't the de-particle.
This is the "de" which is the te-form of "da" or "na", that same "da" or "na" or "desu"
that we have to have every time we use a na-adjective and that we don't need with i-adjectives.
So, once you know these things, I think you will find it easy to understand how na-adjectives
and i-adjectives really work.
If you would like to read this lesson, it's
actually written as a article at KawaJapa
and I'll give you the link in the information
section below.
It's also a chapter in my book "Unlocking
Japanese", and that is of course the course
book for this course of lessons, so we recommend reading "Unlocking Japanese" along with attending
these lessons.
If you have any questions or comments, please ask them in the comments below and I will
answer.
Thank you once again for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.