 
Hello, pretty peoples. KawaJapa no Kyua Dorii desu.
Today we are going to talk about the so-called
"suffering passive" or "adversity passive"
in Japanese.
If you believe the English language textbooks
and general English explanations of Japanese,
you will have to believe that when Japanese
people are suffering from something or annoyed
about something, they suddenly lapse into
the passive voice in a way that makes no sense
at all.
Why does this happen?
Well, the textbooks can't tell you that.
It's just one of those complicated, random
things in Japanese that you have to memorize
– according to them.
The actual reason they can't give an explanation
is because it doesn't really happen.
As I have explained in my main video on the
passive form, there is no passive form in
Japanese.
I call it the "receptive" form and that's
what the Japanese call it too – the "ukemi",
the receptive.
This makes a huge difference, because if you
regard the Japanese receptive form as if it
were like the English passive voice, it completely
confuses you about the way Japanese works.
It makes the simple, logical, absolutely regular
ga-centered structure of Japanese apparently
chaotic and confusing.
There are a few things that the Western textbooks
do to create this confusion, and one of the
larger ones is this whole question of the
so-called passive voice.
So, let's see what's really going on.
The best way to translate the "passive" is
with the English word "got", which means "received".
Actually, some people use this all the time
in English, but it's not regarded as good
grammar.
But in Japanese it is perfectly good grammar
and it is the receptive form.
So, we can say "kaban ga nusuma reta" and
that means "My bag got stolen".
Not "My bag was stolen", which is the English
passive, but "My bag got stolen".
My bag received the action of being stolen:
my bag got stolen.
Now that isn't the so-called suffering or
adversity passive: what the Japanese call
"meiwaku ukemi" , the nuisance receptive.
This is just the regular passive.
A suffering passive sentence, that's to say
a nuisance receptive sentence, in English
would be "I got my bag stolen", as opposed
to "My bag got stolen".
How do we say this in Japanese?
"Watashi ga kaban wo nusuma reta."
How do we tell the difference between the
two?
As always, the key point is where the ga lies.
In "kaban ga nusuma reta", it's the bag that receives the action, the bag got stolen.
"Watashi ga kaban wo nusuma reta", I am the
receiver of the action.
"Watashi ga" – I get the ga: "Watashi ga
kaban wo nusuma reta".
What is the action?
The action is "got", isn't it?
In English we are doing the getting.
Something does the getting. The bag got stolen,
the bag does the getting.
I got my bag stolen, I do the getting.
In Japanese, the head verb of this sentence
is what?
Now, this question shows how one misconception
leads to others.
Most of the textbooks will tell you that the
head verb of this sentence is "nusumareta",
which is a conjugation of "nusumu", to steal.
It's not.
The head verb of this sentence is "reta" (reru),
which means receive.
As I explained in my main video on the so-called
conjugations, the "conjugations" in Japanese
are not actually conjugations at all.
What they are is helper verbs which are attached
to the stem of another verb.
So, in this case, we take the a-stem of "nusumu":
"nusuma", and we add to it "reru", to get
or receive the action.
So in "kaban ga nusuma reta", the fundamental
sentence is "kaban ga reta": "the bag received".
And "nusuma" tells us something else about
it: it tells us what the bag received – it
received "being stolen".
And once you understand that this is how so-called
conjugation is done in Japanese – it's not
conjugation at all – the whole range of
"conjugations", receptive, potential, causative
etc., become very, very easy.
So, if you are having any trouble with conjugation,
as it is called, watch that video and you'll
never have any trouble again.
All right.
So, let's take a slightly more complex example
of the so-called suffering passive.
"Watashi ga obentou wo Sakura ni tabe rareta"
–" I got my lunch box eaten by Sakura".
As you see, in this case we see who did the
action, the action "taberu", to eat.
But "taberu" is not the head verb of the sentence,
so the doer of that head verb, which in this
case is the ichidan form of "reru", which
is "rareru".
(To get or receive an action is "reru, rareru".
In godan verbs, "reru", in ichidan verbs "rareru".)
So the head verb of this sentence is "rareru",
and the doer of it is me.
I am the one who received.
What did I receive?
Well, the rest of the sentence is telling
us. And what I received was "having my bentou
eaten by Sakura".
We always know, in a "reru, rareu" receptive
sentence, who is the receiver, the doing of
the action of receiving the action because
it is always the one marked by ga.
The actor of a sentence is always marked by
ga.
And let's just note that that ga-marked actor
doesn't have to be visible.
We might say "Sakura ni obentou wo tabe rareta"
and that means exactly the same thing: "I
got my obentou eaten by Sakura" because what
the sentence really means is "(Zero-ga) Sakura
ni obentou wo tabe rareta".
How do we know that?
Well, we know it because there always has
to be a ga-marked actor in every sentence,
either visible or invisible.
In this sentence it's not Sakura, because
she's marked by "ni". It's not the bentou,
because it's marked by "wo".
So there must be an invisible ga-marked actor.
There has to be, because every sentence has
a ga-marked actor, whether the actor is visible
or whether the ga is visible or not.
If that seems difficult, please watch my video
on the invisible pronoun and the invisible
particle.
And that is the so-called suffering passive.
Please remember that the course book for this
course of lessons is "Unlocking Japanese".
You can get it from Amazon in paperback or
Kindle editions and please subscribe to this
channel for more information on the real structure
of Japanese.
Thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.