Konnichiwa.
Today we're going to talk about building a core vocabulary the organic way,
and since this is the second in our series on this subject, we're going to get down to the specifics
of how we use Anki as a handmaiden in this enterprise.
Unlike other means of learning core vocabulary, Anki is not the center of our efforts.
We're not spending all our time hunched over an Anki deck.
We're learning core vocabulary in the wild from Japanese-subtitled Japanese anime.
Anki plays a secondary or handmaiden role in our acquisition of Japanese vocabulary.
We use it for two reasons: firstly, to hold words in place between natural exposures,
so that we don't forget them, and secondly, in order to learn kanji,
because we're not learning kanji in the abstract either.
We're learning our kanji as part of living Japanese words and our words
as part of living Japanese experiences.
Our main exposure to the words will come from the soundtracks of the anime which,
once we've worked through them, we will have on our mp3 players.
So, the question is, since Anki is a handmaiden and not our main learning tool,
how do we go about using it?
What should your Anki card look like?
Fortunately for us, when you use something like Yomichan, the default card that it makes
for you is going to be pretty much what we want.
It needs to look like this.
It should have the word on the front.
And on the back it will have the reading of the word if it's in kanji,
the definition of the word, and a native speaker pronouncing the word.
All this will be done for you automatically by Yomichan. [kantan]
Now, why do we want it exactly like this?
Let me answer a few questions on that.
First of all, why do we want the Japanese word on the front?
Some systems, including core vocabulary courses, put English on the front and ask you to produce
the Japanese word.
Why is that not a good idea? Two reasons.
Firstly, in many cases we'll find that there is more than one way of saying the rough equivalent
of the English word -- and all equivalents are rough -- in Japanese, so you're not going
to know what's being expected.
More importantly, is this.
Humans have two kinds of vocabulary in their minds: passive vocabulary and active vocabulary.
Everybody has this, even adults at a high level of literacy have words that they understand
when they see them but don't actually use themselves.
Children, who are the archetypal language learners, have this very markedly.
There are words that they understand but don't produce.
And when they do produce them, sometimes they get them wrong and everybody laughs.
And that's part of the learning process, that's fine.
What's actually going on here is that the word is in the process of moving
from passive vocabulary to active vocabulary.
And this is how we learn language.
Words go into passive vocabulary first and then move into active vocabulary
when we include them in our speech or our writing.
Now, I'm not one of these people who believes in input only.
I think output is important too.
But input leads output.
We get words as passive vocabulary first, and over time as we become used to them they
move into our active vocabulary.
So trying to force everything into our active vocabulary from the beginning by getting us
to produce the Japanese word from the English word is the wrong way around.
Now, some people will ask, why a word and not a sentence?
Isn't it better to have sentence-based cards?
And the answer to this question is that whether it's better or not depends on what you're
trying to do and how you're trying to do it.
Sentence cards come from a very different ecology from the one that I'm suggesting here.
They come from an ecology, fundamentally pioneered by AJATT, in which a) you learn your kanji
from Heisig; that's to say you learn kanji as abstractions with English keywords.
We are not learning our kanji from Heisig.
We're learning it right here, from anime.
Consequently, we need to have the kanji on the front of the card, because if we have
a sentence on the front of the card we will be able in many cases to know that word from
the context of the sentence rather than from recognizing the kanji.
And a second thing is that AJATT attempts to get one to learn Japanese structure from sentences.
That's to say, they don't do any structure, not if you're doing pure AJATT, and that's
natural because at the time that AJATT was designed it wasn't possible to learn Japanese structure.
The nearest you could get was learning the illogical mish-mash that you get in the textbooks
and the Japanese grammar websites.
AJATT didn't recommend that, and I don't recommend it either.
I recommend starting with real structure.
If you do that, you're not trying to gather structure in an intuitive way from sentences on cards.
You're getting your structure as structure, and the only thing Anki is doing is pinning
the vocabulary and helping you to learn to recognize the kanji.
And for that, we can't use sentences.
Now, the third question you may want to ask is, do I need to have kanji on the front?
Isn't it all right just to have the word in hiragana?
And the answer to that is this: kanji are not your enemy -- they're your friends.
They are going to help you to learn vocabulary.
They're going to make Japanese much easier, especially if you know some "hacks" that I
teach you in my other videos.
Believe me, trying to learn without kanji is not making Japanese easier, it's making it far, far harder.
However, and depending on the stage you're at in terms of kanji, it is permissible to
in some cases defer or skip the kanji.
I wouldn't do it a lot, but when you encounter a kanji that looks too complicated for you
at this stage or doesn't seem to be one that you want to learn, then if the card is a kanji
card already, what you can do is open up the editor which you can do either on the computer
or on a mobile device, select the reading of the word in hiragana and just drag that
into the top field where it will appear on the front of the card.
You can also, if you want to, drag the audio into that top field so that you hear that
from the front of the card.
Now, I don't recommend doing this more than you need to, but when you need to you should do it.
Another important thing to bear in mind is that you don't want the kanji for all words.
As a general guideline, if it's not in kanji in the subtitle where you see it,
don't have it in kanji on your card.
And also look for the "uk" sign on your Yomichan. This means "usually kana".
If a word is usually written in kana, you don't need at this stage to learn the kanji.
Will you ever learn it?
Yes, you'll learn it later, and it'll be a lot easier at that stage.
But you don't need to learn it now.
In fact, one of signs of a foreigner who's learned through Heisig is that they use too many kanji.
They write words in kanji that Japanese native speakers don't usually write in kanji.
So check for that "uk", check for whether it's written in kanji or not in the subtitles themselves
and if you want a word to have the kana on the front of the card,
you press this button instead of pressing the usual button, which is this one,
and the card will have the reading, the kana, on the front.
Now, while we're talking about means of filtering what we learn, there's one more important
subject that we must discuss, and that is: which words do you put into your Anki?
If you're doing the anime method at a reasonable pace, you will be getting a flood of new words.
You're not going to be able to remember them all.
When you put an anime or a section of anime onto your mp3 player and
you've worked through it so that you can recognize a lot of words, you won't remember them all,
they won't all pass into your long-term memory.
This is normal and nothing to worry about.
The ones that you really want to pin down are the ones you put into your Anki.
But how do you decide which one should go into your Anki?
You can't put them all in or you'll flood your Anki.
There are three criteria for deciding.
One: if you think you're likely to remember a word, because it's repeated often in the amime
or because it seems natural and easy to you, then you want to consider not putting it into your Anki.
You don't want to put more into your Anki than you actually need to be there.
If it doesn't work out, if you don't remember  it, you'll be getting other chances to put it in.
It's never your last chance to put a word into Anki,
and if it is, that means you don't need it, doesn't it?
The second criterion is: do you think this word is going to be used often in the anime?
For example, if the anime is about witches, you're going to want the word "witch" and
a number of associated terms.
If you don't think you'll remember them naturally from repetition, you need words specific to
the anime that are likely to be repeated a lot in your Anki.
And a third criterion is the general usefulness
of the word.
Now, to some extent common sense will guide you here, but a very useful tool is this one,
which is the Innocent Corpus.
The Innocent Corpus is one of the dictionaries available out of the box on your Yomichan,
and what it is is a list of words compiled from five thousand Japanese novels.
And the number here represents how many times the word has recurred in those five thousand novels.
So we see this word here is "eiga", which means a "movie", and it's recurred over 20 thousand times.
Now, common sense would tell us the "movie" is a fairly regularly used word, but we know
from this than "eiga" is a common word like English "movie" or "film",
not an obscure word like English "cinematograph".
Now, since there are five thousand novels and the word has been used over 20 thousand times,
we know that it's used, on average, four or five times per novel. That's pretty frequent use.
Generally speaking, if a word is used more than ten thousand times over the corpus of novels,
we know that it's a commonly used word that we want to know.
If it's used only a hundred or so times or  less, we know it's an uncommon word that,
unless it's specific to the anime we're watching or to some other target material, we probably
don't need to learn it right now.
The numbers are not infallible and you shouldn't be completely bound by the numbers,
but you should install the Innocent Corpus, which you can do easily from the Yomichan settings,
and use it as a tool in deciding which words to include in your Anki.
Now, there's one thing that you really should not do.
Please don't use romaji.
You should be thinking of Japanese either in kanji or in kana, never in romaji.
This may make things seem a little harder at first, but it's very, very important.
If you really want to put off a particular kanji, you don't want to learn it at this stage, that's fine.
That's your decision.
You don't have to learn all the kanji at once, but I would learn as many as you feel you reasonably can.
The point here is that we are learning kanji not as abstractions.
Just as in Alice in Kanji Land, we never learn a kanji on its own, we always learn kanji
in the context of actual Japanese words.
So, you'll learn any particular kanji first, in whatever word it was you happened to encounter it in,
and then you'll encounter it in other words and you'll get to know it more fully.
This is the organic way of learning. And this is how you build a core vocabulary.
You get a basic mounting-block amount of vocabulary to begin with, and it doesn't matter where
or how you do that, and once you have that, you have a few hundred words, up to about a thousand words,
you jump into anime and you learn the rest of your vocabulary from now on
as real words in real contexts and a core, which is likely to be repeated as
you go through the same or similar anime.
If you have any questions or comments, please put them in the Comments below and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons and all my patrons and supporters on Patreon and everywhere.
You'll find my Red Kokeshi patrons credited in the information section below.
And I'd like to thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.