Konnichiwa.
Today we're going to talk about "dirty tricks"
in, particularly, Japanese vocabulary and kanji.
Now, why are we using dirty tricks?
Essentially, this is because there is a phase
in learning Japanese that I call "The Big Hill".
And this is the transition between
getting some structure and basic working vocabulary
(in terms of structure, I recommend you
watching and assimilating to a pretty reasonable degree
at least the first 20 episodes in my Organic Structure course
and I'll put a card for that over my head
in case you don't know it)
and jumping into real immersion in Japanese material.
And from that point on we're learning everything except structure.
From that we're learning our vocabulary,
we're learning our kanji,
and we're learning how the structure,
the underpinnings of the language, work in real use.
We're not reading a lot of textbooks.
We're not doing textbook-type exercises.
We're immersing in real Japanese.
And because of that, there is a period
where it can be a bit overwhelming.
We've got to overcome an awful lot at once
and it can help to throw in a few dirty tricks
that temporarily shortcut the process.
So, I'm going to use a comment that was sent to me
by one of my patrons, BothFawn-sama,
as an example of the problems we encounter
and what we can do about them.
So, BothFawn-sama writes:
Yes, I do recommend "Shirokuma Cafe"
and I did do a partial walkthrough
of the first episode to help people get started.
I'll put a card for that over my head
so you can take a look if you're interested.
And that's exactly how I feel about it,
but it does have its problems, and BothFawn-sama
goes on to introduce us to some of those.
Right, so I'm going to stop there and talk about this
particular problem, because it's an important one.
By learning kanji as words and
by learning the Sound Sisters particularly,
we can get a good grip on kanji,
but the thing about this is that learning kanji naturally,
learning how the on-readings fit together
to make logical word structures,
is the best way to learn,
but in these early stages and especially
when we're using our passive sound-listening,
which is an important part of the Organic method,
it's just going too fast to remember the kanji structure
to remember the Sound Sisters,
to remember the meaning, all at once.
So this is an occasion where we need to
start thinking in terms of a dirty trick.
Now, the dirty trick I recommend here is essentially
pinning simply the sound of the word to its meaning.
So we're kind of short-circuiting the kanji here.
And we can use any kind of mnemonic we like,
it doesn't matter if it's English or
our other native language or whatever,
because mnemonics are just scaffolding.
We're not going to live with them,
they'll fall away over time.
So, in this case, for example,
we'll take the example of "futsu".
"Futsu" means "ordinary or regular"
so we could just do a silly mnemonic like
"Some people drive cars, but ordinary people use their footsu."
Now, this is silly and it's kind of shortcutting the kanji,
but that's okay because it's going to
give us a link to the word,
we're going to understand it when we hear it spoken,
and then we can go on to a second dirty trick
and we can put the pronunciation of that word,
the hiragana and the sound file
-- and we're automatically creating sound files
as we go along via Yomichan
(and if you don't know what I mean by that, I'll put a card
up there for the method by which we do this) --
onto the front of the card.
So, you're not worrying too much about the kanji.
Take a look at them, but
you're seeing that pronunciation and you're going
straight from the pronunciation to the meaning.
Is this a bad practice that will stop you learning kanji?
Yes it is, so you don't want to overuse it, but it's not
going to stop you learning the kanji permanently.
What's going to happen, especially as you start
putting written-only material into your intake,
like manga and novels and text-centered games,
and as you get more used to the kanji in general
and the on-readings and the Sound Sisters,
you'll find that you get to a stage where
you don't need the pronunciation help and
you can put that back onto the back of the card
where it really belongs.
Now, you shouldn't use this trick too extensively
or it really will start interfering with your kanji-learning.
But you can use it wherever you want
and particularly where you want to clarify
some audio that you're learning so you're shortcutting
the complicated process of recognizing the audio
with a quick audio mindlink
and this means that you're using the audio every day
to build up your understanding of that word
as a sound-to-meaning concept, and then
you've only got to throw in the kanji a bit later and
that's going to become easier and easier as you go along.
Now, you might ask at this stage
"Isn't this going to tie us too closely to an English definition or mnemonic?"
And my answer to that is, up to a small extent it could,
but the best preventative for this is to make sure
you have Japanese audio on the back of that card.
Now, this doesn't mean that you have to
do this monolingual transition thing
that some people talk about, and
I've explained this in another video, which I'll link here.
You just have to find a simple
Japanese-to-Japanese definition if you can
and if you can't at least pop in a very short and simple
-- short as possible, simple as possible --
Japanese sentence.
That way you don't have to look at your English
or whatever mnemonic every time.
All you have to do, once you're actually
starting to learn the word,
is click over to the back of the card, don't even look at it,
just listen to that quick Japanese sentence or
quick Japanese definition and that will give you a check
that you've got the meaning broadly right.
And remember that "broadly right" is all you need.
You going to get used to the word from the actual immersion.
So you pop in that sentence
and you turn it into audio with Awesome TTS,
and I'll put the link to where I explain all this
in the information section below as well.
BothFawn Summer also says
that he gets a lot of leeches
and spends a lot of time dealing with leeches.
Now, leeches are when Anki thinks
you're taking too long to learn a word
and you ought to give up on it for now.
And the thing here is that if you're a perfectionist
and some people are, they try to
unleech leeched words and keep going at them.
Now, if you feel you're on the verge of learning the word
or that you really, really need that word,
then you can do that, but on the whole,
I would allow leeches to stay leeched because
the important thing about all these dirty tricks
-- and leeches in a way are a kind of dirty trick built into Anki --
is that it's never your last chance to learn a word.
You will get another chance to learn it.
If you don't get another chance to learn it,
then you didn't need it, did you?
It's not an abstract game of learning words;
it's a question of learning words that you
actually need to use or understand in practice.
And it's also a question that
SRS Anki is the thief of immersion time,
so you don't want to be spending vast amounts
of your immersion time playing with Anki.
So, where we come to a difficult problem,
if we can shortcut it, if we can temporarily
get it out of the way with a dirty trick,
that's what we ought to be doing.
And of course there's a balance here.
You don't want to do this to every word.
You don't want to have pronunciation or audio
on the front of most of your cards,
but you also need to find that balance
and stop them from holding you up,
stop them from getting in the way
of your understanding the audio.
So, judiciously use dirty tricks to help you to get over
the Big Hill of moving into real Japanese immersion,
which is the core of learning Japanese.
If you have any questions or comments,
please put them in the Comments below
and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons,
who make these videos possible,
and all my patrons and supporters on Patreon
and everywhere, who not only make these videos possible
by allowing me financially to do them but also
maintain this conversation that allows us to keep
getting deeper into the processes of learning Japanese.
And as always I'd like to thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.