 
 
Hello, pretty peoples. KawaJapa no Kyua Dorii desu.
I am Cure Dolly from KawaJapa.
In today's mini-lesson, we are going to talk about a problem that can occasionally be caused
by the potential form of verbs – that is,
the potential helper-verb, ru/rareru.
Spylorm-san says in a very intelligent and
well-thought-out question: “You say that
'Watashi wa hon ga yomeru' means ‘As for me, the book is readable’.
Now I would understand the sentence ‘Hon wa watashi ga yomeru' as ‘As for the book,
I can read (it)’.
So for me, both sentences say the same, just with different emphasis.
But logically, if I simply exchange ‘hon’
and ‘watashi’ one of them should say ‘The
book can read me’.
Am I wrong here?”
Well, from an English grammar point of view you wouldn't be wrong, but the problem that
arises here is really concerned with treating Japanese as if it were English and also treating
the helper verb ru/rareru, in this case ru
– “hon ga yome-ru” – as if it were
a conjugation.
It’s not a conjugation, as I’ve pointed
out before.
So what is happening here?
The wa doesn’t affect anything, because
it’s a non-logical particle, but we have
changed the logical particle ga, the crux particle of every Japanese sentence, from “hon”
to “watashi”, and yet we’re not, as you correctly say, changing the logic of the
sentence.
Why would that be?
Well, in English terms,
what’s happened is that something else has flipped along with the ga, and so the double
flip leaves us back where we started.
But this is only if we’re looking at it as if it were an English sentence.
What’s happened here is that in English
terms “yomeru” has flipped its meaning.
In “watashi wa hon ga yomeru” we’re
saying “As for me the book is readable”
and in “hon wa watashi ga yomeru” we’re
saying “As for the book, I can read it”.
So being readable and being able to read are, if we are thinking of it as the English word
and the English grammar, they are reversing polarity, aren’t they?
But what we need to understand here is that this is not a conjugation.
What it is, is a combined verb and helper
verb - “yomu”, to read, plus “ru”,
which means “can”.
So the way of putting it in English would
be to say something like “read-can” or
“read-possible”.
And it’s a verb, so what’s it’s doing is “making reading possible”.
Now, once we understand that, we can see a little more what’s happening in these two
sentences.
“Watashi wa hon ga yomeru” – “In relation to me, the book does read-can / the book makes
read-possible”.
So the book is doing the action here and what it’s doing is making reading possible by
being readable.
In the other sentence, “hon wa watashi ga
yomeru”, it’s I who am doing the “making
reading possible” – “In relation to the book, I do read-can / I make reading possible”.
And how do I do that?
Well, obviously I do it by being able to read the book.
So, suppose we really wanted to say, “As
for the book, it can read me” – is that
possible in Japanese?
Of course it’s possible.
We’d have to say something like “Hon ga
watashi wo yomeru”.
In other words, we have to put in some extra information to make it clear that the book
is not simply intransitively being readable,
it has a direct object; it’s not just sitting
there being readable, it’s reading something else.
And normally we don’t have to do that, because we can rely on the regular nature of books
and people to make the meaning of the sentence clear.
The important thing to understand is that
potential verbs – essentially what they
mean is the verb plus can, plus possible.
So you see, the potential “yomeru” is
not really flip-flopping.
In both cases, the ga-marked actor is making reading possible.
It is manifesting the state in which reading is possible.
It’s not doing two different things in the
two different sentences, but it is a very
different way of looking at the activity than the one presented by English grammar.
It’s not even easy to express in English,
which is why I’ve had to use rather awkward
terminology like “manifesting the state
in which reading is possible”.
But once we understand that, it does make sense.
And I’m just going to address another question here, which people sometimes ask, which is
“Do I really have to think of Japanese in
terms of these rather convoluted and unnatural
translations?”
And the answer to that is “No”.
No, of course you don’t.
You shouldn’t be thinking of Japanese in terms of these convoluted explanations any
more than you need to, and even less should you be thinking of it in terms of more natural,
but misleading English translations that the textbooks deal in.
You should be aiming toward thinking of Japanese in terms of – guess what – Japanese.
Now, that takes practice, and nothing that
I can teach you is going to take away the
need to practise.
However much driving instruction you get out of a book, or a video, it’s not going to
take away the need to get behind the wheel.
But what these explanations can do is cut
short the process of learning how the language works.
 
If you want to know more about how Japanese is really structured, we recommend “Unlocking
Japanese”, which is available at Amazon
in both paperback and Kindle editions.
Thank you for attending this mini-lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegaishimasu.
Class dismissed.