Hello, pretty peoples!
KawaJapa no Kyua Dolly desu.
Today we are going to talk about the sentence ender "na no".
Now, we've already talked about sentence enders like "no da", "no desu", "na no da", "na no desu",
"no ni", "na no ni", and if you watched the videos on these two groups, you will know
by now that even though they can seem confusing to a newcomer, they are in fact very simple
and logical and easy to understand once you know how they really work.
I'm afraid my voice isn't quite recovered,
so we're going to have to live with that for another week.
All right.
So, "na no".
How does that actually work?
First, let's look at the sentence ender "no".
Now, this is a casual sentence ender.
It's used more by women and children, although it is used by everyone.
And it's not the other "no".
It's not the grammatical particle "no".
It's a sentence ender particle for casual
use.
Is that confusing?
No – if you'll excuse the pun.
It's not confusing because a sentence ender particle can only come after the logical end
of the sentence, and the grammatical "no"
can never come after the logical end of the sentence.
It can come near to it, in sentences that
end in "no da" or "no desu", but notice that
that "da" or "desu" is the logical grammatical end of the sentence.
So "no" coming before it can't be a sentence ender particle.
So what kind of a sentence ender particle
is "no"?
It actually has two functions.
In its first function it's rather like "yo".
It's much more like "yo" than like "ne", and
we've of course discussed those before.
It marks information that you assume the listener not to know and it is a little emphatic.
It doesn't have to be strongly emphatic – it can just be a conversational kind of emphasis.
Now the second meaning is rather different, and that is that it is also a question marker.
We can easily tell the difference between
the two because as a question marker it has
a strongly rising intonation.
So, "Sakura ga konai no" [flat], means "Sakura's not coming – I'm telling you, she's not coming"'.
"Sakura ga konai no" [rising] – "Isn't
Sakura coming?"
I don't think it's easy to confuse those two.
If we do it in writing, even though the question mark isn't a traditional part of Japanese
writing, we can use a question mark to indicate that rising question intonation.
Why is "no" used as a question marker?
Essentially because the formal question marker "ka" is not generally used as a sentence ender
in informal sentences.
It can be, but popping a "ka" on the end without a "desu" or a "masu" before it can sound quite curt,
and there are many occasions when even male speakers wouldn't want to use it.
So "no" kind of substitutes for "ka" in an
informal sentence.
Good.
So I think we understand "no".
When it's used not as a question marker it
is more feminine or child-like than when
it's used as a question marker.
So what is "na no"?
Well, this 'na" is our old friend, the connective form of "da".
The only thing we have to learn here is
a little fact of Japanese which is that
"da" cannot be used before "no".
So, when we complete a sentence we can usually pop a sentence ender just after it.
"Inu da yo" – "It's a dog"; "inu da ne"
– "It's a dog, isn't it?"
But if that sentence ender is "no", we can't
say "inu da no".
We have to use the connective form of "da" and say "inu na no".
And that is exactly what's going on here.
The "na no" ending means that we have ended a copular sentence – that's to say, a sentence
that ends in a noun or a so-called "na-adjective", which is also a noun – and then it's followed by "no".
"Inu na no" means "inu da" – "It's a dog"
– plus the sentence ender "no".
And that's really all there is to know.
A "na no" ending statement is simply a statement that ends with "da", "da" is changed to "na"
because a "no" is coming after it as the sentence ender.
And it's as simple as that.
Please remember that the course book for this course of lessons is "Unlocking Japanese".
You can get it at Amazon in Kindle or paperback editions.
If you have any questions, please ask them in the comments below and I will answer.
And please subscribe to this channel – if you haven't already – for lots more information
on how Japanese really works.
Thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.