 
Konnichiwa. Today we're going to talk about Kansai-ben,
because if you're doing any amount of immersion,
whether it's anime or manga, children's novels, light novels, games, whatever,
you're going to come across Kansai-ben and you probably already have.
So we're going to have a look at the basics
so that you're not lost when you encounter speakers of Kansai-ben.
Now, Japan has a lot of regions and a lot of dialects,
but the one you're going to encounter most of the time,
if you encounter anything, is Kansai-ben. Why is that?
Well, the standard Japanese language is called "hyoujungo",
which means "standard language", and it's essentially Tokyo-ben,
which became established as the standard because Tokyo is the capital of Japan
and also Tokyo is not just the biggest city in Japan by a long way,
it's the biggest city in the world by a long way,
that's to say, it's the largest conurbation in the world.
The second and third largest are Delhi and Shanghai,
and Tokyo is bigger than them by a very, very substantial margin indeed.
And we're talking about size in terms of population here,
so a pretty substantial proportion of Japanese people are in the Tokyo urban area.
So the influence of Tokyo-ben is bound to be very large.
But the second largest city in Japan is Osaka and the Osaka conurbation
which includes Kyoto and Kobe, and this is actually a lot bigger than you might have thought.
It's bigger than the Los Angeles conurbation, it's bigger than New York, Moscow or Karachi.
So while it's the second biggest city in Japan, it's still a huge city by world standards.
This means that while a substantial portion of the Japanese population lives in the Tokyo urban area,
a substantial portion of those who don't live in the Tokyo urban area live in the Osaka urban area,
and Kansai-ben also extends beyond this into the surrounding prefectures.
So it's by a long way the second biggest dialect in Japan, which is why we hear so much of it.
We don't just hear it in characters who are supposed to come from the Kansai region either.
Even in anime about other worlds, other realities,
there will often be one or more Kansai-speaking characters in it.
That's because Kansai-ben is often used just to represent some dialect or other.
It also represents a kind of character. Osaka people and Osaka language
and Kansai people and Kansai language are supposed to have certain characteristics.
They're seen as being warmer, less formal, less obedient to rules,
but often also rougher and tougher and perhaps even in some cases a bit dangerous.
And they're associated with comedy. Manzai pairs of stand-up comedians
and other comedians often come from the Kansai region, particularly Osaka,
and play up their accent for laughs.
So that's something that also happens in anime and other fiction.
The looser-and-less-obedient-to-the-rules stereotype is actually true.
My sister when she's in Osaka usually gets around on a bicycle
and she says that whereas in most parts of Japan when you're cycling
if you come to a Stop sign everybody just stops and waits till it turns green,
in Osaka an awful lot of the time people will have a quick look left/right
and if there's no traffic around they'll zip across. Very unusual in other parts of Japan,
where cyclists and pedestrians would often wait at a red light at 3 a. m.
when there's no cars to be seen in either direction.
So, what are the characteristics of Kansai-ben?
It's actually a full-scale dialect, or not even one dialect but a group of related dialects,
and there's quite a lot of grammar and vocabulary to learn if we were learning the whole thing.
But fortunately, in terms of what we'll actually see in anime and other fiction
there's a more limited range, because Kansai-ben can actually be confusing
even to Japanese speakers of Tokyo-ben or other dialects.
So what tends to happen in fiction is that certain Kansai characteristics
are played up to mark out the speaker as a Kansai speaker.
So this is actually a much easier job. So let's look at some of those characteristics.
One of the more prominent ones is that "ii", meaning "good", is pronounced "ee" in Kansai-ben.
And this sound shift also takes place in many other words that have the "i" sound,
the "ii" sound, or other sounds with "i" in, such as "ei", "oi", "ai".
All of these often get transmuted simply into "ee", and you'll probably have heard this already,
even outside of Kansai-ben, because while it's a notably Kansai characteristic,
it's also used by characters who want to sound tough.
So, you'll hear it particularly with schoolboys who are trying to sound tough and masculine
because they don't want to sound like girls
(which is a big concern with a lot of schoolboys until they grow out of it),
by tough men, gangsters, sailors, etc. And it's not absolutely exclusively male either.
For example, Akira in the anime "Aria" when she gets angry, particularly with Alicia,
often all her "i"s and "ai"s and "oi"s turn to "ee".
And she's using that not because she's reverting to dialect
-- she's probably not originally a dialect speaker --
she's using it in order to express her anger,
rather the way some English speakers of a particular type
use the two "beloved words", only a bit cleaner.
And pronouncing "sugoi" as "sugee" is even commoner.
Some speakers, including female speakers, will use this sometimes.
It's very informal, but it's a way of giving extra oomph to "sugoi": "Sugee!"
So, this is a characteristic of Kansai speech that isn't limited to Kansai speech,
but a lot of the characteristics are limited to Kansai speech.
And one of the commonest and most often used to mark out a speaker
as a Kansai speaker, is the use of the ending "-hen",
which is nothing to do with the "-hen" that means "weird" or "unusual".
This is an archaic helper that is used where standard Japanese would use "-nai".
In other words, it's put onto the end of a verb to turn it negative.
So for example, "wakarahen" means "not understandable".
"Dekihen" means "not possible".
And we even have "arahen" which negativizes the verb of being,
so where in standard Japanese we simply say "nai" to mean that
something isn't there / doesn't exist, in Kansai-ben we say "arahen".
And this actually isn't unknown in standard Japanese,
but it only exists as a fossil in the case of one particular verb.
And the verb is "masu". The negative of "masu" is "masen".
And this "-sen" is really the same as the Kansai "-hen".
The transition from "s" to "h" is a common transition in language.
That's, for example, why "sol" in Latin, meaning "the sun", is "helios" in Greek,
or why "cent" or "percent" means "hundredth part",
because "cent" and "hund" are originally the same linguistic element.
Now, the way "-hen" is used in Kansai, the most standard way,
is exactly the same way that "-nai" is used, that's to say,
it's attached to the a-stem, just as "-nai" is,
but it can be attached in other ways.
It can be just plonked on the end of a verb.
It can be put onto the e-stem.
So it appears to be cobbled up in a variety of different ways.
In fact, the reason is because it goes back to different dialectal subroots,
But we don't have to worry about that. We just know that
if "-hen" is plonked onto the end of a verb, however it's done,
it's going to have the same meaning -- it's going to negativize it.
And there are a lot of individual words that are used in Kansai-ben
that again mark the speaker as a Kansai speaker.
For example, "akan" is used where a standard Japanese speaker would use "dame".
"Aho" is used where a standard Japanese speaker would use "baka".
And in fact in real Kansai-ben, "aho" and "baka" are both used
and they have a slightly different implication; "aho" is actually kinder than "baka".
But Kansai speakers in fiction will probably say "aho" all the time
because it's a Kansai word, it's part of the stereotype.
And another very important thing to understand is that the copula "da" in Kansai-ben is "ya".
And "de", which has two distinct meanings in standard Japanese
-- it can be the particle "-de", which marks a delimitation, or it can be the te-form of the copula --
it has both these meanings in Kansai-ben but it also gets used in place of "yo" in standard Japanese.
That's to say, the particle that marks a piece of information the listener ought to know.
And this means that a very typical sentence-ender for a Kansai speaker is "ya de",
which is the same as "da yo" in standard Japanese.
And of course we're going to see this "ya" in other places too.
For example, "sou nan ya" is the same as "sou nan da".
Now, there are various other expressions and grammatical structures
that belong to Kansai-ben and are often used to mark a Kansai character.
And if you're interested in learning more, please give this video a thumbs up
or make a comment and let me know that you'd like to hear more,
and if you would, I'll make another video on more of Kansai-ben.
If you don't want to hear more, please feel free to tell me that too.
And if you have any other questions or comments,
please put them in the Comments below and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons, my producer-angels, who make these videos possible,
and all my patrons and supporters on Patreon and everywhere,
because all of you are helping to make this possible.
And I'd like to thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.