Konnichiwa. Today we're going to talk about
something that can radically improve the quality
and speed up your vocabulary learning.
And since vocabulary is the largest single job in learning Japanese, this is very important.
And what this is is dynamic cards.
Now, nearly all of us use SRS cards, usually Anki, for learning vocabulary and kanji.
But most people tend to think of those cards as static, unchanging entities.
We create them or sometimes we get a premade deck (which on the whole I don't recommend)
and after they've been created we regard them as fixed entities that just stay unchanged forever
until they fade away into the distance, hopefully learned.
Now, in some cases that's quite all right, but regarding cards as having to be like that
deprives us of a lot of the potential power of cards and can slow down our learning.
We can really turbocharge the process in many cases
by regarding cards as potentially open-ended ongoing projects.
And fortunately it's very easy to do that.
Although we can't do major format-editing and sound-editing on mobile devices,
we can add text to cards or delete text very easily.
And that's mostly what we're going to want to do.
So, what am I talking about? Well, this affects a variety of areas.
The first one is this: I sometimes get people saying to me, "I keep forgetting cards.
I'm not happy with my retention rate. What should I be doing?"
Now, the answer to this is that it's really too broad a question.
We're treating the retention of a card as if it was one thing.
Now, in some cases it is.
Maybe you look at a card, you've got no idea what the kanji mean,
you've got no idea what the pronunciation might be,
you've got no idea what the meaning might be.
If that's the case, you really need to look at your strategy from scratch.
But most of the time that isn't in fact the case.
Most of the time you remember parts of it but you forget parts.
You may know the meaning of the word but you've forgotten the pronunciation.
You may know the pronunciation but you've forgotten the meaning.
You may know the pronunciation of one of the kanji but be confusing the other one with something else.
Or you may be having trouble because it's one of those cases where a Sound Sister kanji
doesn't have the Sound Sister pronunciation.
You may also be confusing one word with another or one kanji with another.
So when you fail a card you need to look at what the actual problem is.
What went wrong on that particular card?
In some cases you can just fail it and take note of what the real answer was and get it right next time.
But in some cases where you have persistent problems or something you've having trouble remembering,
you need to tackle that one problem in itself.
You might want to make a mnemonic for the sound.
If you're confusing two kanji, you might want to make a disambiguation note about the two kanji.
If you're confusing words, you might want to make a disambiguation note about the words.
Let's take an example.
Suppose you are confusing the word "chuukei" with the word "chuudan".
"Chuukei" means a relay or live broadcast; "chuudan" means a break or a stop in activity.
And the reason you're confusing them is that "chuu" is the same in both cases
and "kei" and "dan" look fairly similar.
The main reason they look similar is that they both have this rice-in-a-box element,
even though it's on different sides.
And the meaning of the two kanji is just about opposite to each other,
because the one with a thread plus the rice-in-a-box means inheritance or continuance,
the one with an ax beside the rice-in-a-box means severance or cutting off.
And if you think about that, the rice-in-a-box is perhaps going down a road or being delivered or supplied.
So we have the rice supply, as it were, and where there's a thread there, the rice is continuous,
it continues down the road, it continues down the generations.
Where there's an ax there, it's being cut off.
So it's pretty obvious really, the concepts behind these,
but you need to make a note on the back of your card
of the kanji on the front that's causing the problem
together with the one you're confusing it with, disambiguating the two.
Now, I've talked in previous videos about making disambiguation cards
when you're getting two or more kanji confused,
but in many cases you don't actually need to go as far as making a specific disambiguation card.
If you do it on one word, the next several times you review that word
you're going to go through this process of wondering which of the two it is
and remembering the disambiguation.
And that in many cases is all you need.
You don't need a specific disambiguation card;
that one word will be enough to do the job of disambiguating those two kanji.
So this is the first use of dynamic cards.
You can tackle problems as you come to them.
You can tackle the specific problem that you're having with any given card.
And you make a note on the back.
You don't necessarily always need to make a note on the back.
But in many cases, especially if you've got a sticky card, as it were,
this is a good thing to do, because if you have trouble with it again,
you have to fail it again, you look at that note and most of the time you say,
"Oh, yes, of course! I remember that," and that helps it to stick next time.
Now, there are various other uses for the dynamic card concept,
both at beginner level and more advanced level.
At a relatively beginning level, I've made the point before that you don't always need to learn the kanji.
You don't want to put off learning too many kanji, but some of the time it's a good idea.
Though kanji seem daunting, they seem over-complex,
you can't see why they mean what they mean at all,
you don't know any Sound Sister for them at this stage.
So swap the card around. Put the hiragana on the front,
put the kanji on the back, together with the meaning.
You can also put the sound file for the reading on the front.
Since you've got the hiragana anyway, you don't need to put it on the back.
So, what's going to happen when you do this is that over a little while
you're going to learn that word as a sound-entity.
You'll know it when you hear it in anime, you'll know it when you see it in writing with furigana.
And once you know it reasonably well, it'll get pushed off into the future.
It'll get to the point where you don't see it for six months or more.
And the next time you see it, there's a very good chance that you'll look at it,
you'll look at the back of the card, and you'll look at those kanji again
and you'll say, "Ah, those kanji don't look so daunting now. I already know that one now,
and the other one - ah yes, I think I can guess the pronunciation from the Sound Sister."
At this time, you can swap the card back around again.
Put the kanji on the front and fail the card or else reset the card to be like a new card again.
Now, you might say, "Aren't I learning the word twice?" and the answer is "No, you're not."
Even if you reset the card, usually you'll find that you get rid of it, push it off into the future pretty quickly,
because you know it, unless you're still having a bit of a trouble with those kanji,
in which case you needed the extra practice anyway.
But this allows you to learn at your own pace, to learn the parts you want
when you're ready to learn them and then the next parts later.
In other words, it puts you in charge of the cards instead of the cards being in charge of you.
Now, at a more advanced level, with Organic Japanese you start
at a fairly early stage introducing Japanese definitions.
You don't have to have Japanese definitions for everything.
You don't have to do this "monolingual transition".
But what you do start doing is using Japanese definitions increasingly where you can use them.
So, you'll be having Japanese definitions, taken perhaps from a Japanese dictionary,
or you might be having sentences in Japanese that you can understand
and that will allow you to know what that word means.
It's also a good idea to TTS those Japanese definitions or Japanese sentences
so that you hear them when you review the card.
And I'll put a link below about the latest TTS for Anki, which is free and very effective.
Now, the thing about this is that sometimes in your definition or in the sentence
there may be one, sometimes two, other words that you don't know or don't know well.
If you don't know them at all, you may want to turn it into two cards with the same sentence,
which can be a very good way of reinforcing those two words.
But again, you may not.
So, what you can do is simply regard the other word that you don't know as a bonus or minor word
and use the card for primarily learning the word on the front
but also learning the extra word or extra two words on the back.
Now, you can make notes about that extra word and those extra two words.
A phenomenon that you're often going to encounter is that because you not only see but hear
the sentence or the definition, very often when you look at the front
you'll remember exactly what's on the back.
So, that's really going to be two words for the price of one.
However, you may have trouble with the second word because that isn't the one you're specifically using
and there again you can adjust the card as you go along to give yourself
the mnemonics you need for whatever it is about the second word that you're having trouble with.
And again, it's not a matter of adjusting the card in this case,
but it is a matter of adjusting your attitude to the card.
You may shift from using the card to learn the main word to using it to learn the second word.
So it's a matter of your own discretion, but if you want to you might end up sometimes failing the card
because although you got the first word, you didn't get the second one.
Now, that may seem a bit strange, but it's in fact very effective and very economical
because you're actually going to do less card creation and less reviewing
than you would if you'd made two separate cards.
And in most cases it will end up with you knowing both the words anyway.
So these are a few of the ways that you can make your cards dynamic.
By doing this you solve problems of not remembering particular aspects,
you can disambiguate kanji, in many cases without making a kanji disambiguation card,
you can learn in some cases two or three words for the price of one,
and you can take control of how much you're learning and at what pace you're learning it,
in a way you can't if you regard the cards as fixed, unchangeable entities.
These are really just examples of what you can do.
Once you get the idea that the cards are not your masters but your servants
and that you can change their orders, change their content,
change anything about them to suit your own convenience and your own strategy,
cards become a much more flexible and powerful tool for learning Japanese.
If you have any questions or comments,
please put them in the Comments below and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons, my producer-angels, who make these videos possible
and all my angel-patrons who are helping this revolution in Japanese to become a reality.
And I'd like to thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.