Hello, pretty peoples.
KawaJapa no Kyua Dorii desu.
I am Cure Dolly from KawaJapa.
Today we are going to talk about a new method of learning kanji.
As you may know, I don’t like kanji books.
I don’t like the grinding, rote-learning,
abstract approach to kanji.
I believe that kanji, like the rest of Japanese, should be learned organically.
But I’ve written a kanji book!
Why is that?
Precisely because I believe it can be done
better.
More organically and more scientifically.
What’s the difference between “Alice in
Kanji Land” and other kanji books?
I’m going to break it down quickly into
three parts.
First, “Alice in Kanji Land”, as far as
I know, is the first kanji book to be written
specifically to dovetail with modern SRS learning methods.
when you get “Alice in Kanji Land”, you
will also get a free Anki SRS deck.
This will allow you, by using the deck for
about fifteen minutes a day, to pass the kanji,
the vocabulary, and the structural information about Japanese words and language that you
have learned from Alice’s adventures in
Kanji Land from your short-term memory into
your long-term memory so that you will have it for life.
Secondly, as I have already indicated, you
won’t just be learning kanji.
You’ll learn all the kanji you need for the JLPT Level 5 exam, that is, all the first-grade
Japanese kanji and a good portion of the second-grade Japanese kanji, but you will also be learning
how they fit together, the radicals involved
in the kanji, but not only that, but also
how kanji themselves fit together to form
words, how they interact with other kanji
and with kana, and in many cases how the words themselves work.
Why are we doing all this at once?
Not only because you are going to need this information anyway, but also because that’s
the way memory works.
Let me give you an illustration.
It has been found that chess-masters can look at a board for a few seconds and memorize
the position of every piece, but if you give
them a board that has pieces randomly scattered
over the board in ways that couldn’t have
taken place in a real game, their memory is
no better than anybody else’s.
Why?
Because we remember things when they make a pattern, when they form a story, when they are organic.
So learning things like kanji or grammar as abstract points is the least efficient way of learning.
This is where I differ from Heisig-sensei,
for whom I have great respect.
Now, some people will object that even Japanese children have to learn kanji in the abstract
– they just sit down and memorize kanji – and that’s true.
You can’t just pick up kanji from living,
the way you pick up vocabulary and grammar.
But that is only half the story.
The more important part of the story is that Japanese children never learn kanji as abstractions.
They already know – even the first-grade
Japanese student already knows a lot of Japanese.
When they learn the kanji, they fit into an
entire structure that they already have in  their minds.
They know the words into which the kanji fit.
They know the sound-changes that are made in different forms and different patterns of words.
So when they learn kanji, that is just the
final piece of the puzzle, and it fits into
a structure that they already have in their
minds.
I cannot put you into the position of a first-grade Japanese student, because they know a lot
of Japanese already, but what we can do is the second-best thing, which is give you the
information you need for the kanji and vocabulary and language structure all to form a pattern
in your mind, so that like the chess-master you have a much better chance of remembering it.
The third thing about the book is perhaps
the most whimsical.
It is in fact a novel; you will be encountering the kanji as characters and adventures;
you will be seeing them through the eyes of Alice.
So you will be forming emotional connections with the kanji, not just abstract connections.
You can get “Alice in Kanji Land” from
Amazon or, if you use the link in the information
section below, you can get a signed copy directly from KawaJapa.
This is helpful to me because Amazon swallows up most of the money from the book – and
it could also be helpful to you because in
the future you may find that
you have a collector’s item on your hands!
Thank you for watching this video.
If you have any questions or comments, please leave them in the comments section below,
and you may want to subscribe to this channel to learn more about
the organic approach to Japanese.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.