Konnichiwa.
Today we are going to talk about the Number One Secret of Japanese.
This is the secret that will make the difference between trying to understand Japanese as a
vague, fuzzy, magical language in which every sentence is a kind of guessing game and having
a solid, clear, logical grasp on the language and its structure, so that you know in every
sentence exactly what's going on.
Now, this secret is something that the schools and textbooks don't teach you.
But they do more than just not teach you, they do everything possible to prevent you
from guessing it for yourself.
Now, why would they do that?
I'm not talking about some kind of conspiracy here.
I'm talking about the fact that the way of describing and constructing the language is
fundamentally flawed.
Why is it flawed?
Well, I think we're really getting into an area here that goes beyond grammar.
It's an almost philosophical question.
Japanese and English have very different world-outlooks.
In some ways they are diametrically opposed.
English is a very ego-centric language.
And this isn't some kind of a moral statement: I'm talking about grammar.
English wants to have an "ego" as the main actor, the center of every sentence,
if it possibly can.
Preferably "me", if not "me" then someone else, and if not a person then at least an animal.
It has to be some kind of "ego" actor.
Japanese doesn't work like that at all.
It's very happy to have non-sentient beings as the main actor of a sentence.
You might call this a more animist way of looking at language.
Now, this may sound rather abstract, but it's not abstract at all.
Let's get into some concrete examples.
I'm going to begin with my favorite example, and if you've heard it before, don't go away
because we're going much deeper this time.
My favorite example is: "Watashi-wa koohii-ga suki-da."
Now, we have have the "watashi" or we can not have it;
it will be understood whether we say it or not.
What the textbooks and the schools and everybody else tells you is that this means
"I like coffee".
And "I like coffee" may well be what we would say in English if we wanted to say something
similar, but it's not what this sentence means.
And if you've followed the course up to this point, you can see why it isn't.
The first and most important point here is – look where the -ga is.
The -ga is marking the coffee.
We know that the main actor, the doer or the be-er of a sentence, is always marked by -ga,
so we know that the main actor of this sentence is not "watashi" –"I", it is the coffee,
which is marked by -ga.
"Watashi" could have an invisible -ga after it, but in this case it can't, because we
already know what the -ga is, it's the coffee.
So the coffee is being or doing something.
In English we are told that it is an "A does B" sentence, but we only have to look at it
to see that it isn't.
It ends with "da" – it's an "A is B" sentence, isn't it?
The coffee is "suki".
So, what does "suki" mean?
"Suki" is a noun, and it's one of those adjectival nouns that we've talked about before.
So it's telling us something about the nature or condition of the coffee.
In this case, what it's telling us is that the coffee is pleasing.
That's the core of the sentence: "Coffee is pleasing."
The "watashi-wa", implicit or explicit, is telling us in whose case it is pleasing:
"As for me, coffee is pleasing."
Now, this is very very very important.
Because if we don't know that, if we really believe that this sentence means "I like coffee",
our grasp of -ga and -wo is completely messed up.
If the actor of this sentence was "watashi", it would have to be marked by -ga.
If the thing that the actor was acting upon, by liking it, was the coffee,
then it would have to be marked by -wo.
So we have two particles, and two most fundamental particles, completely confused in our mind.
We now believe that sometimes -ga can mark the object of the sentence instead of the
subject, the thing acted upon instead of the be-er or doer of the sentence.
And we now believe that the object of the sentence, the thing being acted on, can sometimes
be marked by -ga instead of -wo.
And none of this is true.
It never can.
That can never happen.
And if that could happen, Japanese would become chaos.
And that's exactly what it does become in the minds of many students.
So, as we see in this sentence, "watashi" is the non-logical topic of the sentence.
It's marked by -wa.
It's not the actor.
It's not the subject.
"Koohii" is not the object, which would be marked by -wo if it was.
It is the subject.
And "suki" is not a verb meaning "to like"; it's an adjective meaning "to be pleasing".
So every single word in this sentence is being misdescribed by the standard explanation.
And this kind of misunderstanding throws Japanese into complete chaos.
Now, are there many cases like this in Japanese?
Well, frankly, it doesn't matter if there are many or not.
Once your understanding of the particles is messed up, it's messed up.
But as it happens there are a lot.
All kinds of different sentence structures in Japanese throw up this same misunderstanding.
For example, if we say "hon-ga wakaru", or "watashi-wa hon-ga wakaru", we're saying the
book is understandable, but the English texts tell you that this means "I understand the
book", and in this case it's even less forgivable, because there isn't really an equivalent to
"suki" in English, but there is an equivalent to "wakaru".
It means "understandable" or "clear".
We could say "In relation to me, or just to me, the book is understandable", and then
we wouldn't be completely messing up what -ga does or thinking that a noun that should
be marked by -wo can be marked by -ga, at random.
So why, at least in this case, don't the schools and textbooks simply translate it as it really is?
"To me, the book is understandable / Speaking of me the book is understandable."
Because this prejudice for putting an ego at the center of every sentence is so strong
that it takes precedence over learning Japanese correctly.
And these are not just a few random cases.
Later on, we're going to look at the potential form and we're going to look at the receptive
form, which is misdescribed as passive, and both of them are going to throw up forms of
this same problem.
Since they are both fairly large subjects in themselves, I'm not going to talk about them now.
But let's talk about the way we desire things in Japanese.
Let's talk about how Japanese handles desire.
Whether we want something or want to do something, how do we talk about this in Japanese?
Well, suppose we want something.
Let's say "koneko-ga hoshii".
"Koneko" is a kitten: "ko" is child or small thing and "neko" is cat.
And "hoshii" is translated in English as "want".
Now, if you look at it, the first thing you can see is that it's not a verb.
It's an adjective.
It ends in "i", not in "u".
And the second thing you can see, which is the most important, is that the ga-marked
actor of this sentence is not me, who wants the cat.
It's the cat, who is wanted.
So, what does "hoshii" mean?
Well, quite simply, it means "is-wanted".
"In relation to me, the cat is wanted."
And again, if we seriously believe that this means "I want a cat", we're thinking that
the -ga can mark the object of a sentence, the object of the action, the thing we're
doing it to.
So again, we're being confused about the role -ga plays in a sentence, we're confused about
the role -wo plays in a sentence, because the cat should be marked by -wo if it meant
"I want a cat".
And we're confused between the verbs and adjectives.
So again Japanese becomes a strange guessing game in which particles and kinds of word
can change their meaning at random.
Now, suppose we want to do something.
In Japanese we express wanting to do something differently from the way we express wanting
to have something.
And the way we do it is by using the i-stem again.
The i-stem, as I told you before, is a very important stem.
So in order to say we want something we have to add the want-adjective, which is "tai".
So we now have an adjective.
And what does this adjective mean?
It doesn't mean "want" in the English sense.
It can't, because "want" is a verb and "tai", ending in "i", is an adjective, isn't it?
So let's take an example.
This is a slightly notorious example.
"Kureepu-ga tabetai".
Now, the standard English translation of this is "I want to eat crepes".
But, as you see, the pattern here is just the same as in the other cases we've been considering.
The ga-marked actor is not "watashi", it's not "me", it's the crepes.
The desirability of the crepes is not a verb, it's an adjective.
And we need to understand this because if we don't it's not just going to mess up this
kind of sentence – it's going to mess up our whole grasp of Japanese words, Japanese
particles and Japanese structure.
Now, there's no really good way of translating this into English.
We would have to say something like "In relation to me, crepes are desire-inducing".
And that's very awkward.
And sometimes people ask me, "Am I really supposed to use all these awkward literal
translations that you give, rather than using natural English?"
And the answer to that is "No".
You're not supposed to be thinking in terms of my awkward explanations or thinking in
terms of natural English.
You're supposed to be thinking of Japanese in terms of – guess what – Japanese.
I'm explaining it in English to give you a start toward doing that.
But these unnatural translations or explanations are there to help you grasp the structure
of Japanese, not to give you a way of translating Japanese.
Now, as I say, the pattern is the same in all these cases, and I don't think it's very
difficult to grasp.
It may take you a little while to adjust your  mind to the more "animist" way of thinking,
and to do that you may want to watch this video two or three times more to get it fixed
in your head, but it isn't inherently difficult, I think you will agree.
But now we're going to look at something which could seems a little confusing, and I promise
you it isn't, if you just follow carefully what I'm going to say.
We have this sentence here: "Kureepu-ga tabetai" but what if we didn't have the crepes here?
What if we just said "Tabetai"?
Now there's no longer in this sentence what English wants to call the object of desire,
what is in fact the subject of desire, the desire-inducer, and obviously there has to
be a ga-marked zero-car or, as you know, we don't have a sentence.
But what is that zero-car in this case?
Well, the ironic thing is that in this case the zero-car is what the English textbooks thought it was all along.
It's "I".
I really am the actor of the sentence this time, and that may be part of the reason for
a lot of the confusion that happens on this subject.
"Watashi-ga tabetai" means "I want to eat"
– I don't want to eat crepes necessarily
or Sakura's obento necessarily, I just want to eat.
And because there is no eat-inducing subject here, the want-to-eat is attributed directly to me.
And you may be asking – you should be asking – "So, what is this -tai?
Is it an adjective describing the condition of something making you want to do something,
or is it an adjective describing my desire?"
And the answer is that it can be either.
Obviously when it is describing a cake it's also indirectly describing my feelings about the cake,
it's describing the feelings the cake induces in me.
And when there's no cake there, or no crepe here, or no Sakura's obento there,
we just describe my feelings directly.
And this is often the case in Japanese with adjectives of desire.
For example, "kowai", which means either "scared" or "scary".
If I say, "Obake-ga kowai", I'm saying, "Ghosts are scary", but if I say just "Kowai",
I'm saying, "I am scared".
Now, is this confusing?
It isn't confusing because we have a landmark that tells us what to do every time.
And that landmark is -ga.
In these sentences and in much much more complicated sentences, if we watch the -ga and watch the
other logical particles, we'll never go wrong, because the logical particles never ever ever
change their function.
So we can use them as our compass.
And that's why it's so very destructive to induce people to believe they can change their
function as the textbooks do.
If you have a compass and I say to you, "Ah, well, most of the time the compass points
north, but sometimes points south and actually quite a lot of the time it also points east",
you might as well not have a compass.
I have destroyed the value of your compass for you.
And it's the same with the logical particles.
They are absolutely reliable.
They always point north.
They never change their function.
So, if -ga marks the crepes then we know that the subject of the sentence, the thing about
which the engine is telling us, is the crepes, nothing else.
But if we don't have the ga-marked subject  there, we know that by default the zero-pronoun
is usually "I" unless there's a reason to
think it's something else.
It's just the same as in the eel example that we gave in the lesson on -wa.
Now, I'm going to tell you one more thing, and I hope I'm not overloading you with information
in this lesson, but it will have the advantage of giving you even more confidence about what
the zero pronoun is in these cases.
And that is that you cannot use these adjectives of desire, of feeling, about anyone but yourself.
So if I say "Tabetai" and there is nothing to tabetai in the sentence or the context
then I must be talking about me, I can't be talking about you and I can't be talking about
Sakura.
Why not?
Because Japanese doesn't permit us to do that.
You can't use "-tai" about someone else, or "kowai" or "hoshii" – we can't use any of
these things about someone else.
What if we want to say that someone else wants something?
Well, because Japanese is a very logical language, it does not allow us to make definite statements
about something we can't know for sure, so you see it's very different from Western languages.
One thing we can't know for sure is someone else's inner feelings.
So I might think that Sakura wants to eat cake, but I don't know that.
All I know is how she's acting, I know what she says, I know what she does, I know how
she looks, but I don't know what her inner
feelings are.
So if I want to talk about her desire to eat cake, I can't use "-tai".
And I can't use "kowai" to describe her fear, and I can't use "hoshii" to describe a thing she might want.
So what do I do?
I have to add to the adjective of desire a helper verb.
I take the "i" off the i-adjective and I add the helper verb "garu".
And "garu" means "to show signs of / to look as if it is the case".
So if I say, "Sakura-ga keeki-wo hoshi-garu" then I'm saying Sakura is showing signs of wanting cake.
That's what I'm literally saying.
And even if she's actually told me she wants cake, that's still what I say, because I can't
feel her feelings.
I only know what she's doing and saying.
Now, why do we use a verb in the case of other people when it's an adjective in the case
of ourselves?
Again, this is very logical.
I can't describe someone else's feelings because I can't feel them.
I don't know about them.
I can only speak of their actions, and their actions obviously must be a verb.
So this is a useful thing to know, but it also helps us to be very clear when we say
"tabetai" or anything else -tai, or anything  "hoshii", that if there is not a cause of
that emotion, then the zero pronoun must  be me, "watashi", because it can't be anybody else.
We actually can't use it for anybody else.
So that's quite a lot of information in one
lesson, but understanding this is going to
short-cut you right through a huge area of confusion and misunderstanding that troubles
many Japanese learners for years.
If you have any questions or comments please put them in the Comments below and I will answer.
And if you'd like to join our learning community, please take a look at my Patreon.
We always have something going on there.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi producer-angel patrons, who make these videos possible, and
I'd like to thank all my patrons and supporters.
And I'd like to thank you too, for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.