Hello, pretty peoples.
KawaJapa no Cure Dolly desu.
I am Cure Dolly from KawaJapa.
In today's mini-lesson we are going to understand Japanese with one weird trick, as the click-baiters
like to say.
We have learned from the beginning that every Japanese sentence is bound together with
the ga particle.
In any language the fundamental sentence is
telling us that something is something
or something is doing something, and in Japanese
those two vital elements are always tied together
with ga, which is why we say that ga is the
heart of Japanese.
Very often you can't see the ga, but because
of the way the invisible particle works in
Japanese, it is always there and that gives
us the key to why Japanese people seem to
leave so much out of their sentences.
In fact they aren't really leaving it out,
they are just using zero instead of what we
call “it”.
However, what the ga particle actually does
is still a little difficult for a number of
people to grasp, and the reason for this is
that apparently there is no English equivalent
to the ga particle, so we are having to learn
something completely new and alien, it seems.
However, the truth is that there is in fact
an English equivalent to the ga particle –
three of them, in fact.
They don't exist in all cases, but they
exist in very many cases.
Lots and lots of the sentences you use every day use the English ga particle.
So what is this "English ga particle"?
Well, it consists of the three personal pronouns I, he and she.
Each of those is absolutely tied to the ga
function.
“I” means “watashi ga”, “she”
means “kanojo ga”, “he” means
“kare ga”.
They always, always mean that.
So if we say “watashai ga aruite iru”,
that is “I am walking”.
We can’t say “Me am walking” – we
have to say “I am walking”.
If there's a ga in Japanese, it's “I”
in English, always.
Because ga is so special and so central to
language – not just Japanese but in any
language, the ga function is absolutely crucial – because of this it is only the ga function
that has a special personal pronoun.
The other three personal pronouns, me, him and her, mean any particle other than ga.
So if we use any particle other than ga, like wa or kara or wo or ni or any other particle
that can't be translated as I or he or she,
it has to be translated as me or her or him.
Let's take some examples.
“Watashi kara”, “from me” – we can't
say “from I”, we've got to say “from me”.
“Watashi ni”, “to me” – we
can't say “to I”, we have to say “to me”,
don't we?
“Watashi wo kisushita”, “kissed me”
– you can't say “kissed I”, can you?
You say “kissed me”.
So if it's any particle other than ga, then
the English equivalent is me or her or him,
not I or he or she.
So if we want to know – for example, let's
take the sentence.
“enpitsu wa akai”.
Usually we say “enpitsu ga akai”, so when
we say “enpitsu wa akai” we are usually
contrasting it to something, to another pencil which is blue, for example. This pencil,
on the other hand, is red: "enpitsu wa akai”.
And suppose we're confused about whether there's an invisible pronoun here and what particle it takes:
all we have to do is turn the pencil
into a person: “She is red.”
We have to say “She is red”, don't we?
We can't say “Her is red”.
So we know that what this sentence is actually saying is “As for the pencil, enpitsu ga
akai”.
If we take the sentence, “Watashi wa ariuta", "I walked” – perhaps as opposed to someone
else who went by train – we know that the
missing particle is ga, because we can't say
“Me walked.”
That’s Tarzan talk, isn't it?
We can only say “I walked.”
And really it's as simple as that.
If you're ever confused about what ga is doing or whether you need ga, all you have to do
is turn whatever it is into a person in English and use one of those pronouns: I, he or she
– and see if that' s what you need or whether you need the other one: me, her or him.
If we do this, we have a simple intuitive
understanding of what the ga particle does, because
we already know it in English.
Please remember that the course book for this course of lessons is “Unlocking Japanese”.
You can get it in paperback or electronic
editions, and you will find links in the information
section below.
If you have comments or questions, please ask them in the Comments below and I will answer.
 
Thank you once again for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegaishimasu.
Class dismissed .