Konnichiwa. Today we're going to talk about 
some words that I've been asked about recently.  
Several people have asked me to explain the 
word "choushi" and my Gold Kokeshi patron  
Victoria-sama asked me to differentiate 
between the words "yousu" and "choushi". 
Now, she said that the dictionary definitions 
made them seem rather similar and difficult 
to distinguish. And I can see that abstract  
English definitions might have that effect,  
although in practice the two words are very 
different. So let's first look at "yousu",  
which is a relatively simple word, and it  
means a "situation, condition, state". 
We see the word "yousu" an awful lot in 
Japanese-to-Japanese dictionary definitions.  
And I've done a video on Japanese-to-Japanese 
definitions in which I talk about this, 
so I'll put a link above my head  so you  
can follow that up.
But essentially, the reason that "yousu" and  
also similar words like "sama" and "koto" 
are used a very great deal in Japanese 
definitions of Japanese words is because  
an awful lot of Japanese words are two-kanji 
words, which means that they are Chinese-origin  
words and also means that they're nouns, 
because all these Chinese-origin words,  
whatever they do in practice, whether they act 
verbally, whether they act adjectivally,   
come into Japanese as nouns. They then 
need bits of Japanese attached to them, 
like the copula or "suru", to make them do 
what they originally did in Chinese.
But they are in fact by themselves nouns.
And Japanese-to-Japanese dictionaries  
have to account for this fact. 
English-to-Japanese dictionaries don't.
They just pretend that the words are in themselves 
adjectives (so-called "na adjectives") or verbs. 
And that's probably just as well, because 
if they took account of the fact  
that they were nouns no one would know what 
they were talking about because conventional  
"Japanese grammar" never teaches people the 
actual structure of the language. So, to give  
an example here of "yousu" used in this way, 
the word "seisan" is defined as "mugoi yousu".  
Now, "seisan" is a noun; in English it's 
translated as if it were an adjective, because
that's the way it's most often used. So it would  
be defined as "ghastly, lurid, appalling" etc.
The Japanese translation is "mugoi yousu". 
"Mugoi" means "cruel, ghastly, appalling" etc.  
So it's using a Japanese adjective to translate 
the Chinese noun because the Chinese noun is  
mostly used adjectivally. But then it has to 
put "yousu" on the end. It can't just say
"mugoi" because "seisan" is not an adjective. 
It's a noun. So, it's the situation, the state,  
the condition of being "mugoi" which is  
what "seisan" means. 
And we see this used over and over 
again precisely for this reason,   
that if you're being accurate to the
structure of Japanese, and of course  
Japanese-to-Japanese dictionaries are
broadly accurate to the structure of Japanese,  
you have to add something like "yousu" to turn 
that adjectival function back into the noun  
that the word on its own actually is.  
So this tells us what "yousu" is. 
"Yousu" is a condition, a situation, 
a way of being.  
And we see this used in various 
Japanese expressions. For example,  
"yousumi" is the thing of waiting and 
watching the situation, not doing anything
but waiting to see how the situation, 
the state of being, develops. 
Similarly, "yousu-shidai" means dependent  
upon the situation. 
If someone says "What are we going to do?" 
and you say "Yousu-shidai desu",  
you're saying, "It depends upon the  
situation / It depends on how the situation, 
the state, turns out." So, "yousu" is a 
pretty straightforward, literal word.  
"Choushi" is rather different. It's more abstract, 
more metaphorical, and it's best to go back  
to the root of the word, what it really means. 
"Choushi" actually means "tone, musical tone".  
So it's not just the situation. It's more the 
music of the situation. What do we mean by that?  
Well, if we say "choushi warui", we're saying 
"not feeling good": my "choushi", my music,  
my tone, is not good, not feeling good. Very 
often we see the expression "sono choushi",  
which means "that tone / that music", and what 
this means is: doing well / that's right / that's  
the stuff / that's the tone / that's the music / 
that's how we want things to go. When my
channel does particularly well one week, according 
to the rather low standards of my channel,
the YouTube bot says to me "Sono choushi!" 
(It's going well / that's the spirit / keep it up!) 
"Choushi-ni noru"  (riding the music / riding 
the tone) means getting carried away. 
If somebody praises you and you get 
very full of yourself and egotistical
as a result: "choushi-ni noru",   
you're "riding the tone".
If you get carried away by what's going on, 
if you get over-excited by things, 
"choushi-ni noru" (you're riding the tone).
And if you do a lot of that,
people might start calling you a "choushi-mono" 
(a person who gets carried away, who gets  
over-excited, who gets cocky and egotistical, 
or whatever): a "choushi-mono". 
Now, there is another word that, I think, could be 
confused with "choushi" and that's "hyoushi". 
And "hyoushi" is also a musical analogy. But  
"hyoushi" is more the beat, the rhythm of things. 
And we often use this in a somewhat similar 
way to the "choushi" of "sono choushi",
which is "everything's going well,
everything's according to rhythm". 
So, "hyoushi-ni susumu", "hyoushi-ni iku",
both mean that things are going    
according to the rhythm, according to 
the beat: they're going well.
Conversely the term "hyoushinuke" means
that the rhythm is interrupted. 
"Hyoushinuke" is an anticlimax, a letdown,  
a disappointment. 
What we're saying is that the rhythm instead
of going "bubumpbubumpbubump" 
goes "bubumpbubumpbubuphhww". 
That's a "hyoushinuke". 
So I hope this clarifies these three words 
and the expressions associated with them. 
"Yousu" and "choushi" are really not confusable. 
They're very distinct in the way they're used.
"Choushi" and "hyoushi", which sound so
similar and are both musical analogies, are a  
little bit similar. "Choushi" is the commoner of 
the two, although "hyoushi" is not that uncommon,  
and this is one of those occasions where 
with immersion, with getting used to   
Japanese, we come to know where "choushi"  
is used and where "hyoushi" is used, 
and we come to know that  "choushi" is a  
much more regular, everyday kind of word.
If you have any questions or comments, 
please put them in the Comments below 
and I will answer as usual. I'd like to
 thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons,
my producer-angels, who make these videos
possible, and all my patrons and supporters  
on Patreon and everywhere. Thank you all 
for making this adventure into Japanese  
possible. And if you have any words that 
you'd like me to disambiguate or clarify,  
please put them in the Comments below as well, 
because it helps me a great deal to know 
what it is that causes problems. For example, 
I didn't really realize that some people  
might have difficulty between "yousu" and 
"choushi", though once Victoria-sama told me,
I could see how that might very well arise.  
So your telling me what can be a problem is very helpful. 
Thank you for attending this lesson. 
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu. 
Class dismissed.