Hello, pretty peoples.
KawaJapa no Kyua Dorii desu.
Today we are going to talk about the "no da/no
desu/n da/n desu" endings in Japanese.
As you see, there are four endings, but don't
worry about that, because they are all exactly
the same.
They are "no" followed by the copula "da"
or "desu".
The copula is "da" in its normal form and
"desu" in its formal form, and sometimes we
abbreviate the "no" to "n", but all these
four endings are exactly the same.
You sometimes also see "na no da/na no desu/na
n da/na n desu" and so that looks like eight
endings, doesn't it?
But these four are also all the same, so we
really only have one thing to worry about
– I'll explain what that "na" does in a
moment.
I've seen lots of explanations of the form
online and to be frank they are all rather
confusing, because they don't explain the
structure – they don't explain what's actually
going on here.
And that's very important, because if we don't
know that we're going to get confused, especially
when we get to slightly more complex constructions.
All right, so what's really happening here?
Let's take an example.
"Haha ga kuru no desu."
Now, the first and most obvious thing to notice
is that if a sentence ends in "no desu/no
da/n desu/n da" then it ends in "desu" or
"da", doesn't it?
And as we explained in our lesson on the copula
"desu/da" , any sentence that ends in "desu"
or "da" is an "A is B" sentence.
There are only two kinds of sentence in Japanese
or any other language: "A is B" sentences
and "A does B" sentences.
So "nani nani no desu" must be an "A is B"
sentence, not an "A does B" sentence.
Now, if we look at our example, we can see
that the original sentence, if you like, the
sentence we would have started with is "haha ga
kuru", and that means "Mother is coming".
That is an "A does B" sentence, isn't it?
The subject, the doer, is "haha", and the
thing she is doing is coming.
Very simple, and they are linked by "ga" as
they always must be.
Now, when we add "no desu", we are turning
that "A does B" sentence into an "A is B"
sentence.
And what's going on here – what kind of
an "A is B" sentence is this?
Well, the simplest English translation is
to say "It is that Mother is coming".
How do we say "it" in Japanese?
We all know that from the lesson on the zero
particle.
In Japanese the word "it" is pronounced -----. That's
right – it isn't pronounced.
You can't see it when it's written, you can't
hear it when it's spoken, because it's the
invisible pronoun "it".
So, "haha ga kuru no desu" analyzes to "(Øga)
haha ga kuru no desu".
Now, what's the core of this sentence?
As we know, the core of a sentence is always
the subject (the thing that's doing or being
something) and the predicate (the thing that
it's doing or being).
So the core of this sentence is "(Øga) no
desu" – "It is that".
And the whole of the original sentence "haha
ga kuru" is now loaded into that "no", that
"that", that "thing".
It's telling us what the "no" of the "no desu"
is.
And we've seen this, haven't we, in the "nominalizing
no" lesson.
It's another example of the nominalizing
"no" at work.
And the other way to look at what's happening,
which is important, is that we can say that
the core of the sentence is "(Øga) no desu"
and the original sentence has now become the
"shuushokogo", the modifier of the "no".
It's telling – again, it's telling us what
that "no" is.
So that is how "no desu" sentences are structured.
So what about "na no desu"?
What does that mean?
Well, it is exactly the same construction,
and this is the form we use when we are dealing
with a sentence that was a copular sentence
already – one that already had "da" or "desu"
at the end.
As you notice, with "haha ga kuru no desu",
we take a complete finished sentence, "haha
ga kuru", and we add "no desu/no da" to the
end.
Suppose we have a copular sentence, that is
a sentence that says "A is B" and uses a noun
or a so-called na-adjective, which is also
a noun.
For example, "hana ga kirei da" – "Flower
is pretty".
If we want to put "no da" or "no desu" on
the end of that, we have to keep it in a complete
sentence and then add "no da" or "no desu"
to the end.
But we can't say "hana ga kirei da no da"/"hana
ga kirei desu no desu".
You can't do that, because "da" or "desu",
the copula, can only come at the end of a
sentence.
The only thing that can come after "da" or
"desu" is sentence-ender particles like "yo"
or "ne".
So what do we do?
We do what we always do when we want to put
something after "da" or "desu".
I explained this in the adjective lesson.
We use the connective form of the copula,
which is "na".
"Na" is "da" or "desu" in its connective form.
So, "hana ga kirei da": that's the regular
form of the copula; "kirei na hana": that
is the connective form of the copula.
And in this case, when we say "hana ga kirei
da" and we want to add "no da" to the end,
we say "hana ga kirei na no da" or "hana ga
kirei na n da / hana ga kirei na no desu/hana
ga kirei na n desu".
And really it's as simple as that.
We keep the copula from the original sentence
that ended in a copula, but we turn it into
its connective form and then glue something
else on to the end of it, which is the "no
da/no desu/n da/n desu."
It's very important to understand this, because
in casual speech you're going to come across
sentences that end in things like "na no"
and "na no ni" so you have all these similar-seeming,
confusing-looking endings, but, as you can
probably tell already, "na no" and "na no
ni" endings are not the same as what we are
talking about here.
And I'll discuss exactly what's going on in
those sentences in the next lesson.
So, let's look briefly at what are the uses
of "na no da", "na no desu", "n da", "n desu".
As we've seen, it can be explanatory, and
the important thing to know here is that,
taking our original phrase "haha ga kuru no
desu" – in English we say "It's that Mother
is coming", and that's quite a deliberate
construction, isn't it?
It's a somewhat lengthy construction, it's
a little unusual: we're probably only going
to say that when we're responding to an exact
question.
But in Japanese it's a much more regular,
much more casual thing to say.
So you might say it as an answer – "Why
is the room so tidy?"
"It's that my mother is coming" ("haha ga
kuru no desu") – but also you might say
it when your friend walks into the room and
maybe just looks around a little, and you
say "haha ga kuru no desu", and what you're
saying there is "Ah, my mother's coming",
but you're saying, "It's that my mother's
coming, so – you were looking around the
room and I bet you were wondering why it was
so tidy, and well, it's that my mother is
coming."
So it can be used to answer questions that
haven't even been asked and perhaps weren't
even going to be asked.
It can also be used to ask a question which
implies a context to the question.
For example, if you say, "ashi ga itai desu
ka?" you're saying "Does your leg hurt?"
But if you say, "ashi ga itai no desu ka?/ashi
ga itai n desu ka?"
Well, perhaps you've seen the person limping
a little and you're saying, "Is it that your
leg hurts?
Is that why you're limping?"
It implies a context to the question.
Now, it can be used in a variety of other
ways.
For example, it can be revealing something
unexpected or secret, say: "kaigi ni ikanakatta"
means "I didn't go to the meeting".
"kaigi ni ikanakatta no desu" is like saying
"The fact is, I didn't go to the meeting – you
probably thought I did, but I didn't."
It can strengthen a statement, by saying "That
is the fact/ the fact is that it's like this."
It can also soften a statement, by making
it seem more explanatory and therefore a little
more conciliatory.
So, it has a wide range of uses, and I don't
think there is very much to be gained by memorizing
lists of its possible implications.
The important thing is, first of all, to learn
how it's structured grammatically, which I
have taught you, and then to learn what it
means – and it is roughly equivalent to
"It is that..." or "the fact is that..." or
something in English – and then you have
the bones, the structure that you need to
grasp its various implications.
How do you learn its various implications?
You learn them by reading Japanese, watching
Japanese anime with or without subtitles,
exposing yourself to Japanese.
It's the only way to learn the nuances of
the language.
You can read a lot about swimming in books,
and it's a good idea to do so.
You can be instructed on how to do the strokes
on dry land, and it's a good idea to have
that instruction, but in the end you're not
going to learn to swim without getting into
the water.
However, there is one usage that I want to
cover here because it's not very obvious from
the structure, and that is that it can be
used as a command.
If you've ever seen the Anpanman anime you
will undoubtedly have noticed that when Baikinman,
the villain, is bullying the children or doing
something nasty and Anpanman appears, he says
"Yameru n da, Baikinman!"
Now, "yameru" means "stop", but on its own
it's more likely to mean "I'm going to stop"
or something like that – it's not an order
directed to a third party.
But "yameru n da" is.
It means "You, stop" and as I say, that's
not very guessable.
Is there a logic to it?
Yes, I think there is.
And I think we can see the logic if we look
at another construction which is when somebody
says something like, "iku n da/iku no da"
– "it's that we go", and that means something
like, "Okay, let's go/Okay, time to go."
"Iku n da".
Now, when you direct it at another person
in a commanding tone, what you're saying is,
"It is that you stop/Okay, it's time to stop
now/Okay, what's happening now is, you stop".
And "Shukudai wo suru n da" – "It is that
you do your homework."
You can see this as the Japanese equivalent
of saying in English "You're going to do your
homework", meaning "I'm telling you to do
your homework."
"Shukudai wo suru n da" / "Yameru n da" – "You're going to do it/the fact is../it is that you're
going to do it/I'm telling you to do it."
So, I hope you won't have any difficulty with
these endings from now on, except for gaining
the experience necessary to understand all
its nuances.
If you have any questions about that or anything
else, please ask them in the comments below.
And remember that the course book for this
course of lessons is "Unlocking Japanese".
You can get it at Amazon in Kindle or paperback
editions.
Thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.