Konnichiwa. Today we're going to talk about
hearing Japanese in the same way that we hear English or our native language --
that's to say, simply hearing it and understanding it, hearing it naturally.
Now, in order to talk about the ways in which we can do this,
we need to talk about the core principles, the core strategy, underlying the whole thing.
Fundamentally, in learning language there are two approaches.
They're not mutually exclusive: everybody uses some of one and some of the other,
but some people tend very strongly to one approach and others tend very strongly to the other.
And there's a correlation between the two approaches and the kind of person
who finds listening much easier and often has trouble with the other skills
and the kind of person who finds reading and writing and very often speaking too
relatively easy to conquer but really hits a wall with raw listening / understanding.
Now, these two approaches are what we might call "top down" and "bottom up".
Now, my core structure course is fundamentally teaching Japanese from the bottom up.
It's taking the very foundations and building up from them.
So we start off with different kinds of words: nouns, verbs, adjectives, the particles,
the basic core sentence, the stems and helpers, and then we build up from that
to more and more complex sentences, building gradually from one basic concept to the next.
"Top down", on the contrary, is where people start from
a very general grasp of the language and work downwards.
Some people find this very difficult, but other people find it much easier.
And there are a lot of people who've learned language essentially by listening,
and listening is what they're really good at.
In some cases, they're not really good at other aspects of the language.
They can't speak it very well, they can't read it very well, but they can hear it, very competently.
Now, I've had various comments and messages and conversations with people of this type,
and there tend to be three statements that they have in common
about their approach to their successes, their problems with language.
First of all, they've always listened to a lot of Japanese.
They've listened to music, they listen to anime, they just do an awful lot of listening.
And you have to do that in order to be good at hearing Japanese.
And then they'll often say that they find it much harder with written Japanese.
And they don't necessarily have a problem with the script.
They often can actually read Japanese, it's just that they don't find it easy to put it together into meanings.
And the third thing they often say is that although they understand pretty much all of what they hear,
they often have trouble actually explaining what it is that they've understood.
Now, if you've got an AI kind of mentality like mine, a logical approach to language,
this raises certain questions.
The first question I'm inclined to ask is, how is this possible?
How is it possible to be able to parse together the elements of a sentence,
whether you know the names of them or not, the particles, the stems and helpers,
the different kinds of word, to make sense when you're hearing them rapidly on the fly
and then have trouble doing the same thing in writing, when you've got more time to do it all.
That doesn't seem to make sense.
And I think the other statement that they make gives the clue to this.
They say that while they can understand things, they have trouble explaining them in explicit detail.
As an AI unit, my first reaction is to call this what I have called it before, "the illusion of understanding".
And I'm not sure it's really quite as simple as that, but let me say what my first reaction was.
It was that if you can't explain what it is that you've understood, then you haven't really understood it.
You've had the dopamine going through your mind.
You've had all the lights go on inside your head that say "Understood, understood!"
and you feel that you've understood it.
But in fact you can't explain it, so you haven't understood it.
You just have the illusion of understanding.
Now, as I say, I don't think it's quite as simple as that.
But let's go back to the first question.
This does supply, I think, the answer to the first question:
how is it possible to be able to understand when you're hearing and
not do the same job of parsing the parts of a sentence into meaning
when you're reading and you've got more time to do it?
And the answer is that from that statement that they can't explain clearly
what it is that they've understood, it's also clear that they haven't done that job.
They haven't parsed together  the elements of the sentence.
That's not the way they're working.
They're working in a different way.
Now, what is this different way?
In computing there's a concept called "fuzzy matching".
Now, fuzzy matching doesn't mean bad matching.
It means matching in a catch-all sort of way,
so that you can take various kinds of user input that aren't even necessarily correct
and give them back the response they need.
The kind of fuzzy matching that comes from top-down learning is almost the opposite of that.
We take one particular input and we interpret it in ways that are perhaps multiple,
perhaps we never settle on an exact single rational meaning,
but we get a general nebulous idea of what's being said.
And we feel satisfied with that if we have that kind of mind.
And, as I say, I don't really reject this.
Even in native language, lots of people will hear a talk, for example,
and they will take away broad general impressions from it.
They won't necessarily be able to tell you exactly what was said.
And it's not just because they don't remember it.
It's often because they never really got that far in the first place.
Fuzzy listening is not just the preserve of second languages.
It happens in first language. It happens all the time.
A lot of people spend most of their life on the level of fuzzy listening.
And this serves their purposes most of the time for most of everyday life.
So what's wrong with learning language this way?
Well, nothing really.
It isn't something that everybody can do.
A lot of people find this quite impossible.
You need a certain kind of mind, a certain degree of tolerance of ambiguity to be able to do it.
And, of course, you may have difficulty refining things down to more precision.
But if you never want to do that, it doesn't really matter.
Now, if we look at the advantages of fuzzy matching,
I showed this sentence a while ago in one of my videos.
And, as you see, if you are a native English speaker
or very good at English, you can probably read it.
Now, you do this by a top-down process.
You don't go bottom up, carefully trying to rearrange the letters in each word.
You go top-down, grabbing the broad shape of the words
and seeing somehow what they mean.
And this is what you do when you read, because you don't actually look at every individual letter.
You grab words as chunks.
And another thing you're doing when you're looking at this sentence is
there may be some words you would have difficulty with and maybe not be able to rearrange,
but because they're in the context of a sentence
you take them in the context of what comes before and after them
and then you see what they must have been.
This is how top-down listening works.
And it's very important, because at the kind of speeds
people talk, careful parsing is just not possible.
You need to be able to grab information in chunks.
Now, as I said, the two are not perpetually divorced.
The fact that you've done a lot of bottom-up work is actually going to help in your top-down work,
because the more bottom-up concepts become second nature to you, the more you work with them,
the more you can simply incorporate them into your chunking top-down listening
without them taking up the kind of time that you can't afford at full speed.
So having done a lot of bottom-up work helps you enormously with your top-down work.
But the important thing to understand here is that having had a lot of success with bottom-up work,
and we do get a lot of success with bottom-up work... once we've grasped the basics of the language,
we find that we can parse sentences, we can read most of what we want to read pretty easily,
we can watch anime provided we've got subtitles and a bit of time,
and it's a natural assumption to make that if we just continue with that and continue with that,
ultimately we'll get to the point where we can listen in the raw,
just listen to people talking with no preparation.
Now, there are two problems with this.
The first is that it does take time to parse things properly
and the second is that we never really have enough information.
We may get to a point eventually where we have enough information, but that takes a very, very long time.
If you watch anime with subtitles, you know that you have to look up some words,
you have to work out what some phrases actually mean or look them up.
You don't have time for that in raw, full-speed listening.
So you can't use quite the same techniques.
The fact that you have used those techniques and continue
to use those techniques in other situations where you're reading
or where you're using Japanese subtitles, will be a very great help to you.
But the important thing is not to fall into the trap of thinking that because they're a very great help to you,
you can just continue along that path until you become competent at listening.
You do need at some point to listen in a top-down manner.
So you need to have periods where you put aside parsing,
you put aside worrying about what this word means and what that word means
and you just try to get from all the cues available to you,
the actions, the facial expressions, the tones of voice, as well as the words,
just the way you use the context as well as the words themselves to grasp those jumbled letters.
You just use everything you can to get the feeling of the anime as you're watching it.
Now, I've heard some people say what you should do is not worry about the bits you can't get,
but be pleased about the bits you can get.
Be glad that you've got to the point where you can get as much as you can get now.
And I think that's good advice up to a point, but it's not the advice I would give.
The best advice in these cases is to stop thinking about what you can get and what you can't get altogether.
The anime you watch, purely top-down, no Japanese subtitles,
no stopping and going back to listen to something twice and try to get what you missed,
just sitting and watching it.
The aim is not to be pleased with the bits you can get.
The aim is to forget all about language, to forget all about learning,
to forget all about what you can get and what you can't get, and just enjoy the story.
If you really hate not knowing something, then choose something that you've watched before,
probably a year or so ago so that you're not fresh from having watched it but you're not getting completely lost.
But the important thing here is that the experience is a top-down experience.
You're not even trying to use your bottom-up knowledge.
You will be using it, because a lot of it has already passed into your unconscious mind.
It's so much a part of your thinking you can't even help using it.
But the important thing here is to relax and enjoy
and experience it in the way that a top-down learner experiences it.
My sister, when she was in Japan, had a four-year-old homestay sister
and every Sunday they used to watch a Precure anime, and although that's for smallish girls,
it's not like Anpanman, it's not for little children.
There are lots of bits in it that are quite complex in language, that explain things in a complex manner.
Now, this four-year-old girl would sit riveted to the screen from the beginning of the show to the end.
There must have been various bits that she just couldn't understand, but she was just watching the whole thing
and I don't think she was thinking at any point, "I really don't know what's going on here".
I don't think that's what she was thinking.
She was watching the villains -- it's often the villains who have the most complicated speeches --
taking in their menacing manner, realizing what a threat they were to the Precures and to everybody else.
The point is that from a top-down perspective there are various kinds of understanding
from the simplest understanding of just knowing whether someone's angry or happy or sad,
going down layer by layer to getting more precise, but at every level there is understanding
and it's not an illusion of understanding.
It's actual understanding but not perfect understanding.
And we need to be able to tolerate that and tolerate a lot of it in order to get to the point
where we really hear Japanese in the way that we hear English or a native language.
If we spend all our time worrying about what we're getting and what we're not getting,
all we're going to do is slow down that process and possibly stop it altogether.
Now, if this top-down approach doesn't come at all easily to you -- and I perfectly understand if it doesn't,
it's not the most natural thing for me -- is it really necessary?
And the answer to that is, it is pretty much necessary if you really want to be able to understand the language
and you're not in Japan, immersing with people who don't speak English a lot of the time.
But that is really only if want to be able to hear raw Japanese.
If you're happy to have Japanese mainly as a written language that you can read, that you can write,
and that you can watch anime or drama or anything else provided there are subtitles,
then no, you don't need to do this.
And even holding conversations with Japanese people won't be impossible.
If you're having one-on-one conversations, they will tend to talk carefully enough
for you to catch what they're saying.
So it may not actually be necessary for you to cultivate the skill of listening,
and I don't even recommend starting it for most people until you've got
quite a bit of bottom-up understanding as a basis for doing it.
Your listening ability will build gradually and other exercises that aren't quite so top-down,
such as watching at full speed with subtitles, which increases your ability to read fast
as well as your ability to hear and improves your ability to understand the kind of things people do say,
and also listening with backtracking, so that you can re-hear things.
All of this is going to add to your ability to hear, and I do recommend using them as well.
So, the fundamental thing to take away from this is that if we want to cultivate near-native level listening,
that's to say, if we want to hear people speaking and simply understand what they're saying,
we need to cultivate this two-pronged attack on the language,
not just the bottom-up precise matching, but also the top-down fuzzy matching,
because native speakers use this all the time.
You use it in your native language much more than you realize.
If you didn't you couldn't do half the things you can do
and you wouldn't be able to unjumble jumbled words anywhere near as easily as you actually do.
So this is the secret ingredient, the missing link that makes listening so very difficult,
especially for people with a fundamentally logical bottom-up approach to language
and to life and with a low tolerance of ambiguity.
The thing to understand is that the top-down fuzzy matching isn't something you can't do.
It's not something alien to you. It's something you're already doing.
We just have to train the mind to apply the same techniques to Japanese,
and the method I recommend for starting to do this is essentially the inverse
of the bottom-up anime method that we use in Organic Japanese. In other words...
Cultivating the habit and the ability of simply watching anime for the sake of watching anime,
enjoying them, getting what you can from them in a top-down manner
without trying to go back to your bottom-up habit just for that period while you're watching is all-important.
If you have any questions or comments,
please put them in the Comments below and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons, my producer-angels, who make these videos possible,
and all my patrons and supporters on Patreon and everywhere.
I feel so grateful and privileged that so many humans feel that it's worth supporting
this effort to make Japanese possible to more and more people.
And I'd like to thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.