Konnichiwa. Today, we're going to talk 
about the thing that  
makes complex Japanese sentences possible
and also supplies the key to 80 to 90 percent
of what's going on in any complex 
Japanese sentence.
So if we understand this, we can analyze sentences.
If we don't, it's very, very difficult indeed.
And this is what I call "modification structure".
So what does "modification" mean?
Modification essentially means telling us
something about something else.
So, a very simple kind of modification is 
that if we say "boushi", which means "hat",
and then we say "akai boushi", which means
"red hat", we've modified "boushi" with "akai".
"Akai" is telling us something more about
the hat: it's telling us that it's a red hat.
So adjectives, when they go before something,
are a very simple kind of modifier.
And that "when they go before something" is
all-important 
because there are only two laws of 
Japanese word order.
The first is that the engine always comes
at the end of the logical clause.
The second is that anything that modifies
anything comes before it.
So, why is modification structure so 
important in Japanese?
Let's go right back to my first lesson.
I told you, the very first thing in Japanese 
to know is that every Japanese sentence,
that's to say every logical clause, has 
two elements.
These are the only ones that are necessary,
they're the core of the sentence,
and you can't have a sentence without them.
And there are only two ways of making a 
Japanese sentence more complicated 
than that simple "A-car and B-engine".
One is to string logical clauses together
so you have a compound sentence 
with more than one A-car and B-engine 
in it, connected with 
clause-connecting elements like the te-form 
or a "but" or a "because" or something.
And the only way that you can make a logical 
clause in itself more complex, the only way,
is to say something more about A (tell us more 
about A), or something more about B. 
In other words, to modify A or modify B. 
And this is why Japanese relies so heavily 
on modification structure.
It's really the only way apart from compounding 
to make sentences more complex.
So Japanese uses modification structure to
do all sorts of things that are handled by
other strategies in English and other languages.
So, what I want to do now is look at 
a few sentences 
and analyze how their modification 
structure works.
So, here's the first one: "Kanojo-ga itta 
koto-ga uso de aru koto to wakatta."
And this means "What she said turned out to
be a lie, turned out to be a false thing".
Now, in English you see we don't use a 
modification structure for that, 
but in Japanese it's done purely by 
modification.
So let's break it down and see what's 
 going on.
First of all, the core of the sentence is 
"koto-ga wakatta" (thing became clear).
But then we're told more about the thing and 
about the "became clear".
So, "kanojo-ga itta"-- which could be a logical 
clause in itself (she said) --
is modifying "koto". And we know this
because we're not ending the sentence 
with a full stop or anything 
and we're not running into a clause connector.
We're running bang into a pronoun, "koto", and 
what happens when we run a sentence into
a pronoun like "koto" is that we modify that
"koto" so that we know what the "koto" is,
and I call this "putting the preceding sentence
into a koto box".
We can then handle the contents of that  
"koto box" as a simple noun.
And that's exactly what we're doing here.
We're marking it with -ga and making it 
the subject of the sentence.
And then, "uso de aru" modifies the 
second "koto".
"De aru", as you may know, is a form of "da"
or "desu", so "uso de aru" means "is a lie",
and if you want to know why "de aru" is 
 being used here, 
I made a whole video on "de aru" and 
 I'll link that above my head, 
and that will make it clear why it's being 
used in this position.
So, "uso de aru" modifies "koto", and then
"koto to" modifies "wakatta", so all of this
is modifying the sentence engine, which is
"wakatta" (became clear).
So, in Englishized Japanese, what we're 
saying is 
"she-said thing lie-is thing {quote} 
 became clear".
Now, {quote} here of course, the use of "to",
has no equivalent in English.
It's not a quotation, it's a particle, but
but it's telling us that that idea,
that concept, became clear.
In other words, "The thing she said turned 
out to be a lie, turned out to be a false thing." 
Let's take another example: 
"murabitotachi-wa yukuefumei-ni natta neko-wo 
sagasu tame-ni yama-no naka-he dekaketa." 
In English, that would be "The villagers went 
out into the hills to look for a missing cat".
Now, the core of this is "murabitotachi-wa 
[zero-ga] dekaketa" (the villagers went out)
and everything else is telling us more 
about their going-out.
It's modifying the engine, "dekaketa".
But the thing here is that we can have 
 modifications within modifications.
So, "yukuefumei-ni natta" modifies "neko".
That tells us more about the "neko": 
 it was a cat that went missing.
And then that modified "neko" becomes part 
of another modification structure: 
"neko-wo sagasu" modifies "tame".
"Tame" is a noun meaning "sake, or purpose".
And then "neko-wo sagasu tame-ni" 
modifies "dekaketa": 
for the purpose of seeking the cat went-out.
This is all modifying the sentence engine
"dekaketa" (went out).
But before we get to it we have another 
modification for the sentence engine  
and that is "yama-no naka-he", and that 
also modifies "dekaketa".
So we can add two separate modifiers for the
same element, one after the other.
And that shouldn't be too surprising because
we've done this from the very beginning.
For example: "omise-ni pan-wo kai-ni itta"
(I went to the shops to buy bread).
Again, in Japanese this is a modification
structure, and we have two separate modifiers.
The core is "[zero-ga] itta" (I went).
The first modifier tells us where I went; 
the second modifier tells us why I went.
So, this "neko" sentence, "the villagers went 
out into the mountains to look for 
a missing cat", is exactly the same structure, 
only a little more complex.
Now, let's take an example from "Shirokuma 
 Cafe", which I've talked about 
in another video: "Gorogoro suru-no-ni 
isogashii kara ato-ni suru yo."
This is where Panda's mother has talked about
looking for a job, and what he's saying is
"gorogoro", which means literally lazing about
or rolling about, the way pandas do; 
and the reply is "Because I'm busy with lazing 
around, put this off till later."
So the core of this is "[zero-ga] isogashii"
(I am busy).
"Gorogoro suru" -- this is "laze-around do",
and it's put into that no-box again, 
so we can treat it as a noun.
So, "gorogoro suru" modifies -no, we 
then add the particle -ni, 
and "gorogoro suru-no-ni" modifies 
"isogashii".
So, "I'm busy with the thing of lazing around /
 lazing around is the target of my busyness".
So, now let's take a slightly more 
complex example: 
"kanojo-wa hoka-no onnanokotachi-ni 
banji-ga umakuitta to aizu shita." 
(She made a signal to the other girls to 
tell them that everything went well.)
And, as you see, this is not a modification
structure in English, 
but in Japanese it's a modification 
 structure yet again.
So, the core is "[zero-ga] aizu shita" -- "kanojo-wa
[zero-ga] aizu shita" (she gave a sign).
So then, "hoka-no" modifies "onnanokotachi".
"Onnanokotachi" are girls; "hoka-no" means
the other girls.
"hoka-no onnanokotachi-ni" modifies "aizu 
shita": it tells us to whom she made the sign.
"banji-ga umakuitta to" also quotes the content 
of the sign, the meaning of the sign, 
which is "everything went well", and that 
also modifies "aizu shita".
So again we have two modifiers for the engine,
which is "aizu shita", and they tell us 
to whom she made the sign and what the 
content or meaning of the sign was.
And now we're going to look at one that 
 I did in another video, 
which has caused some people a little 
questioning, so once again 
let's look at this one and break it down in 
terms of its modification structure: 
"Ichiba-de katte kawa-ni otoshichatta okashi-ga 
sakana-san-ni taberareta."
And this means "The candy that I bought at 
the market and done dropped in the river 
got eaten by a fish".
Now, the core of this sentence is "okashi-ga
taberareta" (the candy got eaten) or,  
if you want to be very strict, "okashi-ga rareta"
(the candy got), because strictly speaking
"tabe" is telling us more about "rareta": it's telling what it got: it got eaten.
Now, the tricky bit about this sentence  
 really is that we have in fact 
the remnants, as it were, of a compound 
sentence,
two logical clauses: "ichiba-de katte" which
ends in a connector, 
and then "kawa-ni otoshichatta" (I bought 
at the market and dropped in the river) 
but all this runs directly into a noun, "okashi".
So we know that the whole thing, both partial 
logical clauses, are working to modify "okashi".
So all we have up to the point of "okashi"
is one modified noun.
And we know quite a lot about the candy: 
we know it's the one that she bought 
at the market and dropped in the river.
We can then mark that noun with -ga and say
what happened to it:
"sakana-ni taberareta".
And again, we could just say "-ga taberareta"
but "sakana-ni" is modifying "taberareta".
It's telling us by whom it got eaten: 
it got eaten by a fish.
So, these are fairly simple examples. 
 If you have more complex examples 
or other examples that worry you, please
put them in the Comments below, and
if they're interesting enough I'll do another 
video on some more complex examples.
If you have any other questions or comments,
please put them in the Comments below 
and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons,
my producer-angels,
who make these videos possible, and 
all my patrons and supporters
on Patreon and everywhere, and all of you  
who like and comment on these videos, 
and of course you personally for attending 
 this lesson.
Thank you for helping this project to go ahead,
for helping us to find keys to the complexity 
of Japanese
and to understand that once we know the 
structure 
these apparently baffling complexities 
are easily penetrated.
And once again, if you have ones that are
still puzzling you, 
give them to me in the Comments below, 
we'll take a look at them and,
if they're interesting enough, we'll make 
another video just looking at those.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.