Konnichiwa. Today we're going to talk 
about "kagiru" and "kagiri".
"Kagiru" is a verb meaning "limit" or 
"restrict",
and "kagiri" is the i-stem, therefore the 
noun-form of that verb.
If you don't know about i-stems making 
noun-forms,
I'll link a video above my head which tells you
all the secrets of the mysterious i-stem.
Now, Japanese likes limiting expressions,
expressions to do with limits and boundaries.
I did a video on "uchi" a little while ago
and I'll put a link above my head 
and in the information section below.
"Uchi" concentrates on the enclosure, on 
the area that we're in 
and everything else is outside of.
"Kagiri", on the other hand, concentrates
on the boundaries of that enclosure,
the edges beyond which the enclosure 
does not reach.
And this gives rise to a whole range of 
expression strategies, 
some of which are quite literal, others
of which are very metaphorical
and can confuse people if they don't  
understand where they're coming from.
So, let's start with a very simple use of
"kagiru".
"Shusseki-wa shoutaisha-ni kagiru."
"Shusseki" is attendance at whatever the event
may be.
It is limited at "shoutaisha" (invited persons).
Outside that limit, "shusseki" doesn't exist.
You can't attend the meeting or whatever 
unless you are an invited person.
Now, another mainly literal use is "koe-no
kagiri-ni yonda" 
(I called at the limit of my voice). In English 
we might say "the top of my voice".
What we're saying here is the limit as loud
as my voice would go.
So these are quite literal and easy to understand.
But then we get expressions which I think
most of you will have heard 
at some time and are perhaps 
 a little more confusing.
So, "natsu-wa aisukuriimu-ni kagiru" -- 
now, loosely in English that means 
"In summer, ice cream is the best thing".
What we're actually saying is  
"Speaking of summer, 
when it comes to summer, it reaches 
its limit at ice cream",  
in other words, ice cream is the furthest 
you can take summer /
ice cream is the pinnacle of summer / 
there's nothing beyond ice cream when
we're talking about summer.
And this can be used in all kinds of different
expressions, for example: 
"undou-nara suiei-ni kagiru" (if it's exercise 
/ if we're talking about exercise, 
it reaches its limit with swimming 
 ["suiei"] /
swimming is absolutely the best kind 
of exercise). 
And moving on from this we get expressions
like "kanojo-ni kagitte sonna koto-wa shinai".
And again, in loose English this would be
"She of all people wouldn't do such a thing
/ she'd be the last person to do such  
a thing". What we're actually saying is
"She is the very limit of people who 
wouldn't do such a thing".
So just like ice cream being the best thing in 
summer or calling at the very maximum extent
of your voice, she is the maximum, the extreme
of people who wouldn't do such a thing.
Other people might possibly do it, even if
you'd think they wouldn't, 
but she is the very limit of the kind of person 
who wouldn't do that kind of thing.
Now, the concept of "kagiru" (limit) is often
used negatively to show that 
something is not limited to a particular 
statement, a particular notion.
So, "jisho-ni kaite aru koto-ga tsune-ni
tadashii-to-wa kagiranai".
And this "-to-wa kagiranai" essentially sums
up the previous statement 
and says that's not limited to being the case.
So what we're saying here is "Things that are
written in a dictionary are always correct" --
that's the statement, then we quote that
"-to-wa kagiranai": 
"It's not necessarily the case that things written 
in a dictionary are always correct."
And I think we found that out to be true on 
various occasions.
Now, again, this "kagiri" can be used for the
limits of one's knowledge and very often is,
so "watashi-no shitte iru kagiri-de-wa
sonna kotoba-wa nai".
So, in English we would say "As far as I know,
there's no such word", but the expression
strategy here is to modify the noun "kagiri"
-- "watashi-no shitte iru kagiri" 
(the limit of what I know): "Up to the limit 
of what I know, there is no such word."
And actually in this case it's pretty similar
to the English: 
"as far as I know / to the limit of what I know".
And it's interesting here that while English
says "as far as I know", 
Japanese achieves the same broad pattern 
by modifying the noun "kagiri" (limit).
And as we talked about last week, modification
does an awful lot of the heavy lifting in
Japanese that's done by other strategies in
English.
Now, another common expression which can be
a bit confusing is the kind of expression
we find in "isoide iru toki-ni kagitte 
basu-ga okureru" 
(limited to times when we are in a hurry,  
the bus comes late).
Now, this is obviously not literal, but it
expresses a sentiment often felt, 
that the bus or whatever it is that does 
something we don't want it to do does it 
specifically when we very much don't want 
or can't afford it to do it.
So really that expression that can seem a 
 little bit confusing at first is a very natural
kind of expression which I think you do find
 in English sometimes.
It's only when we really need it that it doesn't
happen.
Now, another expression is "sono ba kagiri".
So, "sono ba kagiri koto-wo iu" means she
says things on the spur of the moment / 
she talks right off the top of her head.
"Sono ba", which we've discussed in another
video, which I'll link, means literally 
"that place / the appropriate place / the place
one would happen to be at at the time", but
of course in Japanese as in other languages,
place can also mean a time or an occasion.
So, "sono ba kagiri koto-wo iu" means she
says things that just arise out of
the particular occasion and nothing else
 -- limited to that particular occasion / 
having no real relevance outside that 
particular occasion.
So the implication is just essentially talking
stuff of no real value that 
comes off the top of her head.
And a very common expression related to this
is "kenka-wa sono ba kagiri sa" -- 
and this is a popular expression, it's not 
exactly a full sentence.
The "sa" is rather making it into a "should".
"Sa" here is saying "that's how it ought to be 
 / come on, that's how it should be".
And it's translated into English as "quarrels
should not be continued".
Sometimes it's even translated as "let not
the sun settle on your wrath", 
which of course is nothing to do with
what it's really saying.
But the point here is that quarrels should
be limited to "sono ba" 
(the occasion, the event on which they arise).
So if you quarrel with someone today you shouldn't
be carrying on that quarrel tomorrow.
Very good advice.
So this is a range of the circumstances 
in which the "kagiri / kagiru" concept 
is applied in Japanese. There are others, 
of course, but with this information 
I think you'll be in a better position to 
 see what's going on.
If you have any questions or comments, 
please put them in the Comments below  
 and I will reply as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons,
my producer-angels, who make these videos possible,
and all my patrons and supporters
on Patreon and everywhere, 
the people who like and comment on the videos, 
the people who just watch them.
Thank you all for supporting this channel
and helping us to clarify Japanese,
helping us to see what's really going on 
 instead of learning things as 
a set of magical formulae that match up 
 to English expressions, 
seeing what's really going on so that we 
can actually understand them 
and actually use them and know what
we're doing.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.