Hello, pretty peoples. KawaJapa no Kyua Dorii desu. I am Cure Dolly from KawaJapa.
In today's mini-lesson we are going to talk
about three very common logical
particles as they work in relation to
human interaction – that's to say, when we
are doing something in relation to
somebody else. The three particles are
wo, ni and to, and they form what we
might call a sliding scale of mutuality
with to as the most mutual and wo as
the least mutual. Why is that? Well, if you
think about it, wo is the object-marking particle, isn't it? If we do
something to somebody with wo, we are
actually doing something TO somebody.
We are treating them simply as the object
of our action. If we tickle somebody or
kill somebody, there is no mutuality implied there, is there? We
are simply doing it TO them. Now, with
the verb "hanasu", to talk,
we cannot "darika wo hanasu". Just as in
English, you can't "talk somebody". It would
mean the same thing – "darika wo hanasu" is "to talk somebody" and you can't do that.
You can kill someone or tickle them, but
you can't talk them, in English or
Japanese. In English you have to talk to
someone or talk with someone. In Japanese
you "dareka ni hanasu" or "dareka to hanasu", and the difference between the
two is very similar to the English
difference between talking to someone
and talking with someone. If you use ni,
you are treating the person as the target,  the
destination of your talking. You can't
use wo because it still implies some
mutuality. Even if the other person isn't talking,
they are at least listening – at least we hope so. If we use to – "dareka to hanasu" –
we're saying that we have a conversation
with them, we talk together.
The same applies to the verb "au", to meet. We can't say "dareka wo au". We can say you
meet someone in English, but in Japanese you can't say the equivalent.  You either
"ni au", which doesn't imply a great deal of
mutuality but you are still meeting the
other person, aren't you?
And with 'to au" we're implying a meeting
of two people. So if we say – a quite
common expression – "anata ni aitakatta",
"I wanted to see you, I wanted to meet you, I've been wanting to see you", it doesn't
mean "meet" in a sense of meeting a new
person. It means – you might say to an old
friend, you might say to someone you've
been separated from for a little while, your
mother, or anybody. "Anata ni aitakatta", "I wanted to see you". And this is a
very common expression. If you said
"anata to aitakatta", you'd be
saying something more, I think, like
"I've been wanting us to get together,
I've been wanting us to meet together."
There it's much more of a mutual idea,
the idea that is there is activity going on
on both sides of the interaction. In the
causative form, as we discussed in the 
causative lesson, you can't use to at
all. You can only use either wo or ni. And
why is that? Well, it's because when you
do a causative action you are very much
in control of the action. You're either
making someone do something or allowing them to do it. If you're making them do it,
clearly you are in complete control
of the action, so all other things being
equal – and they're not always equal, as I
explained in the potential lesson – but all
other things being equal we will tend to use wo for making someone do something and
ni for allowing them. Making them is
taking complete control of them; it's
treating them as the object. And allowing
them is making them the target of the
object; it's still implying that we have
control over them –
if we can allow someone to do something, the implication is
that we also can prevent them from
doing it. So here we have the three
common logical particles of human
interaction, a sliding scale of mutuality
from wo which is completely non-mutual to to which is completely
mutual with ni in between the two. If
you want to know more about how
Japanese is really structured, we
recommend "Unlocking Japanese", which is
available at Amazon in both paperback
and Kindle editions. Thank you for
attending this mini-lesson. Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegaishimasu. Class dismissed.
you