Hello, pretty peoples! Kawajapa no Kyua Dorii desu. I am Cure Dolly from KawaJapa. Today
we are going to talk about
the potential form of Japanese verbs. The potential form is very simple, and it is formed by adding an
extremely small and simple helper verb to the end of the original verb.
The helper verb is simply ru,
and if you look in a Japanese dictionary, you'll see that it is in fact a jodoushi, a
helper verb. We attach this helper verb to the
e-stem of the original verb
So,
yomu becomes yome-ru – can read, read is possible. Oyogu becomes
oyoge-ru –
swim is possible, can swim. Now, in the case of the ichidan, the so-called ru-verbs,
the helper verb ru becomes rareru, and
as I imagine you noticed, this rareru is the same as the rareru
that we use in the receptive, the so-called passive, form.
And I think this sometimes worries beginners – they think "Isn't this going to be very confusing?" And the answer to that is "No,
it's not confusing."
In English, if you think about it,
we have three very very commonly used words to, too, and two.
They are completely different words.
They are very common words – we use all of them all the time – and how often do we get confused?
We don't really get confused, do we? And
it's the same
with the two rareru helper verbs.
They are used in different
circumstances, and once you're actually reading Japanese, using Japanese, you'll find that
you're not getting confused between them. Nearly all the time, it's very obvious which one it is.
For completeness, I should tell you that
rareru is often
shortened simply to reru. In Japanese, this is called
ranuki which means 'leaving out the ra'. I don't think you'll find it in your textbooks or in Japanese written for foreigners.
But in ordinary speech and in non-formal writing you'll often see reru
used instead of rareru, and
in that case there's no possibility of confusing it at all. But confusion is not really an issue. Now,
there can be an issue or a problem with the potential form of Japanese,
and that is most often caused by our old friend the
textbook habit of pretending that Japanese is English.
Let's take a very typical example:
"Watashi wa
hon ga yomeru." This is usually translated into English as "I can read the book."
And if you're saying that this is how you would normally put it in English, that's fine.
But if you are saying or implying that the Japanese actually reads:
"I can read the book," this is not just confusing. It's destructive.
It undermines and destroys the whole
fundamental structure of Japanese, which as I have explained before always centers around the ga particle.
Every Japanese sentence is at heart a simple logical statement: "something ga
something." The basic Japanese sentence is made up of
something that is doing or being something – the subject or shugo –
and the thing that it is doing or being –
the predicate or the jutsugo.
So the basic structure of this sentence is
"Hon ga yomeru"  –  "The book is readable."
The subject of the sentence, the shugo, the thing that is doing something, that is the book.
The thing that it is doing is being readable.
"Watashi wa," if it is present, is the
non-logical topic of the sentence, and the rest of the sentence is a comment on that topic. "In
relation to me, the book is readable." This works exactly in the same way as
"Watashi wa hon ga wakaru"  – "In relation to me, the book is understandable." "Watashi
wa nihongo ga dekiru" –  "In relation to me, Japanese is possible." "Watashi wa
koohii ga suki desu" – "In relation to me, coffee is likable." It's the book, it's the coffee,
it's Japanese,
that is doing the action of each of these sentences, and by trying to force "I"
to be the doer of the sentences we are completely
confusing what ga does and what the other particles do. And this is important because
as you get to more complex sentences
your infallible guide, your signpost, is the Japanese
particles and especially the ga particle. If you keep your eye on the particles, you
always know what the sentence is doing and
saying things like
"Watashi wa hon ga yomeru" – saying that the doer of this sentence is "I", that the sentence means
"I can read the book" is like putting a random magnet on your compass. You no longer have a working
compass and you get very lost.  Now,  some people may very reasonably point out that
sentences like "Watashi wa hon wo yomeru" are
also possible in Japanese. This literally means "I can read the book." You are
perfectly safe here in translating it that way. The doer of the sentence is I and the thing being read is the book.
And there is a slightly different implication between the two. I pointed this out in "Unlocking Japanese"
in the case of
"Tori ga kikoeru" versus
"Tori wo kikoeru". The difference is that
"Tori ga kikoeru" really means "A bird can be heard, a bird is audible."
It's better to say "A bird is audible," because the temptation is to translate it passively,
and it is not a passive sentence, anymore than the so-called passive, the receptive form, is actually
passive. As far as I am aware, there is no passive in Japanese.
So, "Tori ga kikoeru" – "A bird is
audible." "Tori wo kikoeru" –
"I can hear a bird."
We are putting a special stress in the second case on the fact that
"I" can hear the bird – you might not be able to, but I can.  But the thing to bear in mind here is that in
sentences like
'Watashi wa hon ga yomeru,"
that is the usual, the natural way of putting it. You can put it the other way,
but it isn't the usual way of doing it. If you look up on Google, "hon ga yomeru"
versus "hon wo yomeru,"  you'll see that  "hon ga yomeru"  is used
approximately five times as often as  "hon wo yomeru."  So most of the time you are going to see it in
that form, so it's important to
understand what that form actually is. If you're translating a novel or something,
it doesn't matter putting it into normal English,
but if you want to know how the Japanese grammar works you must be aware of what the ga particle is doing
at all times. Because, like the speed of light, the ga particle is always constant,
it's always doing the same thing, and you can measure everything else by it. Please remember that
the textbook for this course of lessons is "Unlocking Japanese". You can get it at Amazon in paperback or
Kindle editions, and we recommend following this course of lessons along with reading the book.
Once again, thank you for attending this class.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.
 