Konnichiwa.
Today we're going to talk about the most powerful hack I know for dealing with Japanese kanji
and their pronunciation.
Learning kanji is always going to be a big job, but there's one trick that can make
handling kanji a great deal easier.
I called it a trick or a hack because I believe in organic Japanese, as you probably know.
I don't think we should be learning chopped-off bits and pieces, whether they be kanji or
vocabulary or bits of grammar.
I think we should learn everything as an organic whole.
But for this particular hack I break my own rule.
Because it is a massive force multiplier.
For a very small amount of effort, you can shortcut a huge amount of the problems involved
in kanji and vocabulary.
Now, this isn't something I invented.
This is based in the very nature of kanji themselves, the way they are designed,
right back from ancient times.
And the basis of it is this: as you know, if you know anything about kanji at all,
most kanji, most even slightly complex kanji, are made up of separate elements.
Long before you get to the stage where you don't often see a kanji you don't know,
long before that, you get to the stage where you don't often see a kanji that, while you may not
know it, you know all the elements it's made up of.
And understanding these elements is fundamental to understanding kanji.
If you don't know anything about this, I recommend my book "Alice in Kanji Land",
where I give you a grounding in basic kanji in an organic manner.
Now, for this lesson, I'm assuming you do have this basic knowledge.
So, the fundamental piece of information here is that many complex kanji, not all of them,
but a very considerable portion, contain one element that is there to tell us how it's pronounced.
What this tells us is the main on-reading of the kanji.
Obviously, it's the on-reading, because on-readings are the Chinese readings of kanji, or at least
they're based in what used to be the Chinese readings of the kanji, and since this
phenomenon goes right back to the initial design of kanji, and since the kanji came from China,
it's going to relate to the on-readings, not the native Japanese kun-readings, of the kanji.
But that's good.
Because that means that most of the time when we see these kanji in combinations, we know
how they're pronounced.
Now, it doesn't work a hundred per cent of the time, but it works enough of the time
to be immensely powerful.
It means that if we know the pronunciation of a word and we see the kanji, even if we didn't know
those kanji, in many cases, using what I call the Sound Sisters, the sound elements in kanji,
we can give a very good guess as to how it's pronounced.
Conversely, if we know the kanji of a word but we can't remember how it's pronounced,
using the Sound Sisters we can give a very good guess as to how it's pronounced and
be right most of the time.
And if the knowledge of the pronunciation was in the back of our minds somewhere, which
it very often was, we'll know whether it's right or not.
This helps us with learning kanji, it helps us with remembering kanji after we've learned them,
and there are about a hundred of these elements and I'm going to show you how they work,
and then I'm going to introduce a technique I've built for learning them.
And as I say, while I don't believe in learning things out of context, learning these hundred
elements with the deck I've built – it's free – is such a massive force multiplier that
for the small amount of effort that you put into this learning job you reap huge benefits
for the rest of your Japanese-learning career.
So we're going to start by looking at just one of the Sound Sisters, and this is "ko".
Now, you probably know this as the kanji in "furui" – "old" – and its on-reading is "ko".
If you need a mnemonic for that, just remember how curious it is that the on-reading of "old"
is the same as the word for "child" – "ko".
This is one of the Sound Sisters whose own on-reading is the same as the on-reading in
the kanji she governs, and she governs a lot of kanji.
Look, here they are.
And all of these kanji are going to have the on-reading "ko" most of the time.
So this governs quite a lot of kanji, but more importantly, because these are the on-readings
that you'll find in combined-kanji words, this governs dozens and dozens of words.
So you can see that by learning this one Sound Sister you've got a huge force multiplier.
You have a key to the pronunciation of a whole range of words.
And each of the Sound Sisters does this, some of them govern more kanji, some of them govern less.
All of them govern a lot of words.
Now, in my original article on this subject I grouped the Sound Sisters into groups,
Sound Sisterhoods as I called them, of elements that govern the same sound, because I thought
this was the best way of grouping them and remembering them.
Since then, of course, I've made the deck, but I still think the Sisterhoods are a useful way to get started.
And whenever I come to a card in the deck that is covered in the article, I refer to the article.
Now, you don't need to try to learn all the details of what I'm saying here,
all I'm doing is giving you the fundamental idea.
Then you can pick up the article, pick up the deck, and take it from there.
Once you've learned all hundred Sisters, you open the door to the pronunciation of literally
thousands of words.
So, just to show you how it works, we're going to look at the Sisterhood called the Sei Sisters,
and I call them the SAInts and SAges, and they all have the pronunciation "sei".
And they all seem to have a theme of life, righteousness and purity, and this could be a coincidence.
I think it's a little more than a coincidence.
I think sounds tend to be bound to meaning to a certain extent in Japanese.
But that's really neither here nor there.
Most of what I say about the Sound Sisters is really just there for mnemonic purposes,
so you can attach those elements to the sounds they govern.
So, the Sei Sisters – there are four of them.
The first one is the one that we first meet usually, I think, in the word "tadashii" – "correct, or righteous".
The second one means "life, or birth, or directness, or rawness".
The third one, of course, means "blue" – it's the kanji of "aoi".
And the fourth one is actually the kanji for "naru" – "become" – but we don't usually use
the kanji for that word.
I see it as a knightly Sister with a helmet and a ceremonial spear.
The point about these is that they all have the pronunciation "sei".
They're a little more complex than most of the Sisters in that they have a secondary pronunciation.
All of them have a tendency sometimes to be pronounced "sei" and sometimes
to be pronounced "jou".
"Sei" is their dominant reading but they can also be "jou".
And that's relatively unusual.
Most of the Sound Sisters, although they don't work a hundred per cent of the time,
they work most of the time, and most of them only have one dominant pronunciation.
This particular group has two, and you'll quickly learn to associate "sei" and "jou" in your mind.
But as you see, between them they govern 27 kanji and hundreds of words.
The Sound Sister principle actually governs quite a lot more than the hundred I put into the deck,
but the ones I put into the deck are the main ones, the dominant ones.
Each one of them either covers quite a few kanji or appears very frequently in words.
So this hundred is the core you need to give you the maximum leverage over words, but also,
in grasping the Sound Sister principle, which you will do by the time you've got to grips
with this hundred, you will apply it automatically in the other more sporadic cases that you
find throughout Japanese kanji.
Now, you'll find the article in the link below and from there you can find the deck.
It's completely free, but you need to sign up to my newsletter, the Dollygram, in order to get it.
It's actually just a rather convenient way of distributing it, and if you don't want
to receive the Dollygram I won't be offended if you cancel your subscription right away.
As a matter of fact, I'm so busy these days I don't get around to sending out many Dollygrams
any more, though I'm trying to get better at that.
So, pop down to the information section below and get the links.
And get started with the single most efficient hack in the whole of kanji.
If you have any questions or comments, please put them in the Comments below and I will answer as usual.
And I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons, my producer-angels, who make these videos possible,
and you'll find a list of my Red Kokeshi patrons in the information section below, after those vital links.
I'd like to thank all my patrons and supporters on Patreon and everywhere.
And I'd like to thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.