Konnichiwa. Today we're going to talk about
two words in Japanese, "tame" and "nagara", 
both of which can seem ambiguous. 
So we're going to look into that ambiguity
and see how it can be very easily dealt with.
The first is "nagara". This has two 
meanings that are easily distinguished 
because they are structurally different.
One attaches to verbs;  the other form 
attaches to nouns and adjectives. 
The most important form is the one that
attaches as a helper to verbs. 
It attaches to the i-stem and it works 
somewhat like the te-form,  
except that while the te-form tends to  
imply sequential action,
one action after another, and causality 
in some cases,
one action because of another, not as
strongly as with "kara", for example,  
but indicating some kind of a 
causal relationship,
"nagara" indicates simultaneity of action.
And this is important because it is really  
the main way in Japanese to express that the 
same actor did two actions at the same time.
So we can say,  "arukinagara utatta" 
(I sang while walking)";   
"nakinagara ayamatta" (she apologized 
while crying). So that's very simple, isn't it? 
The other meaning, the one that attaches
to nouns and adjectives
 -- and it attaches directly to them, 
not to any kind of stem,
(of course nouns don't have stems, but it  
also attaches directly to adjectives) -- 
has the meaning "despite the fact" or 
"even though".
And we may note that we can use English 
"while", which is the other meaning
of "nagara", in exactly the same way.
For example, we can say "while she is
pretty, she's not very reliable". So, we can 
say "kodomo-nagara kenmei-ni hataraku"  
(even though a child, he works diligently). 
"Kanojo-no kotoba-wa kibishiinagara-mo 
atatakai" (her words are strict but kind). 
And notice that here we use the -mo 
particle after "nagara" 
in a way that it's often used, which is to 
stress contrastive expressions.  
Common collocations of "nagara" 
are "warenagara": 
"ware", as you probably know, is an old  
but still-used word for "I", 
and "warenagara" means "even though
it's me, I'm still going to say it", 
so we might say, "shiken-wa 
warenagara umaku itta"
(even though I say so myself, I did well 
in the examination). 
Another very common "nagara" collocation 
is "zannennagara",
which means "while it's unfortunate".
It can be used ironically, 
or it can be used in refusing something, 
or for all kinds of purposes.
So we might say "zannennagara 
dekimasen" (unfortunately I can't do it). 
Another usage is closer to "mama", and
we've discussed the meaning of "mama" 
in another video, the meaning being the
"unchanged condition" of something.
So we might say "kare-wa 
mukashinagara-no namake mono da" 
(he's as idle as he used to be).
In other words, the "mukashi",
the old state of him, is in its 
unchanged condition.
And we can use this "mukashinagara" 
in more serious contexts,
like "mukashinagara-no omise" (a shop  
that's still in its old-fashioned condition,  
looking the way it did perhaps a hundred 
years ago). And of course
"mukashi" is not the only thing you can 
use with this "mama"-type "nagara".
We can use it in cases where we might 
have said "mama".
Now, let's move on to "tame".
"Tame" is confusing because it has two
meanings that can seem opposite.
The primary meaning of "tame" is "sake", 
in the sense of the reason, the cause,
the valuable thing for which we do 
something. So, for example,
"kodomotachi-no tame-ni hataraku" 
(I work for the sake of the children); 
"seigi-no tame-ni tatakau" 
 (I fight for the sake of justice);
"shiken-no tame-ni benkyou suru" 
(I study for the sake of the exam).
More generally, it can express the 
intended purpose of anything;
for example, "kodomo-ni kikaseru 
tame-no mukashibanashi" 
(old tales for telling to children).
 And we might even ask 
"nan-no tame-ni sonzai shite iru no darou" 
(for what purpose do I exist?)
The other main meaning of "tame" seems 
almost opposite because it usually
signifies the bad result of something. 
Not something we're in control of 
(which is usually the case with "tame" --
we're doing something for some purpose), 
usually something outside our control 
and usually linking it to a bad result.
So, for example, "jiko-no tame-ni shinda"  
(he died because of the accident);   
"ame-no tame-ni kouen-ni ikenai" (because 
of the rain we can't go to the park)
Now, there's no structural difference 
here, the way there is with "nagara".
The structures are the same, and this sort 
of thing sometimes worries people.
But in practice there is rarely any difficulty 
in understanding any sentence,
even when they are very similar. So, to take
a sentence we've used before here,
"shiken-no tame-ni benkyou suru" 
(I study for the sake of the exam).
But we might also say, 
"shiken-no tame-ni zenzen asobenai" 
(because of the exam I can't have any fun)
And you see these are the two uses.  
Their structure's the same,
but there's really no difficulty from context 
in knowing which of the two is meant.
And that's just about always the case.
One collocation with "tame" which is 
worth knowing is "nen-no tame",
and this means "just in case / just to make 
sure". "Nen" here means "mindfulness",. 
so for the sake of mindfulness, for 
the sake of being sure, let's do this,
let's pack a second pair, let's check 
the situation out one more time.
Just in case: "nen-no tame". 
If you have any questions about "tame" 
or "nagara", please put them
in the Comments below and I will  
answer as usual. 
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons, 
my producer-angels,
who make these videos possible, and all 
my patrons and supporters on Patreon   
and everywhere, everyone who watches 
these videos, who likes, or comments, or 
just comes to watch them, and especially  
you for attending this lesson.
Thank you for helping all this to take 
shape.
Thank you for helping us to look into the 
real meaning of everything in Japanese,
so that we can understand it on an 
instinctive level 
and see what it's really doing.
Thank you once again.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.