Konnichiwa.
Today we're going to talk about some of the alternate ways of writing common words in Japanese,
which you are going to encounter in your immersion, assuming that you haven't already.
You probably have.
And these are things that nobody ever explains properly.
What I mean by that is that the dictionaries most often
put these alternatives into the same entry as the main kanji for the word,
leaving you to assume that these are just different ways of writing exactly the same thing.
And they're not.
The other thing they do, which is the opposite mistake,
is to give them their own entry with their own specific meaning,
leaving you to believe that this is a different word with the same pronunciation,
that's not interchangeable with the main kanji. And this again is incorrect.
So, let's start with one of the most basic words in Japanese, which is "miru",
which is written with this kanji that we all know,
an eye on legs that goes around the place looking, seeing, watching.
And when I say that, looking, seeing, and watching,
we can see that the word "miru" overlaps on the meaning spectrum
with at least three other English words: "look", "see" and "watch".
There aren't separate Japanese words for these three things.
One of the ways Japanese deals with this is that
"miru" often has helpers attached to its stem to refine the meaning.
So, we have words like "mi-iru", "mi-tsukeru", "mi-kakeru", etc.
But another thing it does is that it uses different kanji to write the base word "miru",
showing its different implications.
So, one that you'll see fairly commonly is this one. And its meaning is "watch".
It's probably closest to the English word "watch", but it means it in the particular sense
of watching a movie, watching a ball game, watching a play or something like that.
It's the word we use when we settle down to put our full attention on something
and watch it, not just look at it or see it.
So what does the kanji mean? Where does it come from?
It has three elements, and one of them is that base kanji "see", the eye on legs that goes around watching things.
It also has a bird and an arrow. That thing in the upper left-hand corner is a variant of the arrow kanji.
Now, if we cast our minds back a few hundred years, if somebody wanted to shoot a bird,
there were no shotguns, you had to do it with an arrow.
And that was an awful lot harder than doing it with a shotgun.
You had to watch that bird very, very carefully, take very careful aim,
in order to hit a bird with a single arrow, because you're not going to get a second chance.
This is the kind of intense watching that this kanji represents.
In the modern word "miru", the particular aspect of this that it's boiled down to is
the kind of watching we mentioned, watching a movie, watching a ball game, watching something.
But we mustn't assume that this is what the kanji always means outside the context of the word "miru".
Its on-reading is "kan" and it's always concerned with watching things closely in one way or another,
but not necessarily in the same sense as when it's used in "miru".
Now, the next version of "miru" that we commonly encounter is this one.
This again has the eye-on-legs, the basic "miru" kanji,
and next to it is the kanji which means originally "an altar",
a place where religious things, a god, a statue, a religious artifact, is displayed.
So the derivative meaning of this is "show".
And when it's written in "miru", what this becomes refined down to is
seeing in the sense of investigating, observing closely,
not in the sense of watching a play or watching a ball game,
but in the sense of observing something closely, investigating it, examining it.
And if we wanted a mnemonic for this, we might say that just as altars are places of religious observance,
this version of "miru" really overlaps with the English word "observe".
And again we shouldn't assume that that's the way it's refined down in every use of this kanji.
Its on-reading is "shi" and what it means as a kanji is essentially the very basic phenomenon of seeing itself.
So "shikaku" means the sense of sight itself, one of the five senses, the one that allows us to see.
And we could see this as being the God-given gift of sight.
It's also used in "shiryoku", which is "eyesight", a person's individual power of seeing.
Now, these are the three main variants of the word "miru" in its regular senses
that will tend to be lumped together by the dictionaries as if they were all the same thing.
There are other "mirus", and we'll often see these two.
The dictionaries tend to treat these as if they were completely different words.
But as we're going to see, they're not.
These two are both medical "mirus".
The first one is essentially what a doctor does
and the second one is essentially what a nurse does.
The first one means "examining" in a medical sense;
the second one means "looking" in the sense of looking after, at least when it's used in the word "miru".
So this one, which has "a word" and then an element which is the Sound Sister "shin" --
And whenever we see this kanji in anything other than "miru",
it's usually going to be pronounced "shin".
And it's very dedicated to medical examination.
That's really what this kanji is about.
So we have it in words like "shindan", which is a medical examination.
The other one has an eye and a hand.
It represents an eye shaded with a hand, looking at something,
and outside of "miru", we see it in words like "kanban", which is a signboard,
as you'd see in front of a shop or in front of a station.
And you might shade your eyes to look up at it.
But in terms of the word "miru", it has this specific medical sense.
It also has this sense in words like "kanbyou", which is looking after a sick person, watching over a sick person.
But in terms of "miru", it specifically means watching in the sense of watching over a sick person,
while this one means "looking at" in the sense of a doctor looking at a person.
We often find this in the expression "oishasan-ni mite morau", which means "have a doctor look at one".
It's very often translated, extremely confusingly and structurally destructively,
as "see a doctor", but that's not what it means at all.
You might say that in English, but it isn't you that's doing the seeing of the doctor,
it's the doctor that's doing the seeing of you.
And that's what "oishasan-ni mite morau" means.
It means "have the doctor look at one".
And I've done a whole video on this use of "morau",
so you can take a look at that if you'd like to know more about it.
Now, when I was explaining this in the course of that video,
one of my commenters said I'd written it wrongly:
I wrote it like this: ["mite morau"],
and I should have written it like this: ["mite morau"].
And this isn't in fact true.
The reason I used the simple "miru" kanji is because that's the one I assume everybody knows.
But my commenter, looking in the dictionary, quite reasonably supposed from the way they put things
that the only way you can say this kind of "miru" (being examined by a doctor) is by using the special kanji.
But that's not the case. This isn't a completely separate word.
It's another specialized variant of "miru", and it's always the case with these kind of groups,
you can always use the base kanji, the simple kanji, in place of any of the other meanings.
You can use the specialized kanji if you want to, but you don't have to.
Now, there are also several other ways of writing "miru", but they're a bit more obscure, not used so often,
and I'm not going to throw our minds into confusion by bringing them in at this point.
These are the main ones that you need to know for immersion.
And, if you like, I'll look at more kanji alternatives in the future.
I've already done one video on the kanji alternatives for "wakaru".
And I think this is probably an area, because it's so very little covered by textbooks,
dictionaries, websites or anybody else, that we could profitably go more deeply into.
But let me know what you think about that in the Comments below.
And of course, if you have other questions or comments,
please put them in the Comments below as well.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons and all my patrons and supporters,
all my Kokeshis, who are my producer-angels, who make these videos possible.
And I'd like to thank everyone who subscribes to this channel,
who gives me likes and words of encouragement,
because all of this is helping me to go forward, to build the channel
and to build a new way of learning and understanding Japanese.
And I'd like to thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.