Hello, pretty peoples. KawaJapa no Kyua Dorii
desu. I am Cure Dolly from KawaJapa.
Today I'm going to address one very simple question
that I have been asked on numerous occasions.
And that is: how do you pronounce small tsu
in Japanese? When it's romanized, we double
the consonant that comes after the small tsu,
as for example in "yatta" ("I did it"). However,
in English we pronounce the double t in "hatter"
just the same as we pronounce the single t
in "hat", so that doesn't help us very much.
People sometimes explain to leave a little
gap where the small tsu comes, and while that's
kind of right, it doesn't help people with
the exact pronunciation because they feel
that it's something that they don't really
know how to do, something that we don't do
in English, an alien sound, and therefore
one that we don't quite know how to make.
What I want to tell you is that we actually
do have this sound in English. Where do we
find it? Well, let's look at an expression
like "black cap". Now, unless you are pronouncing
it very carefully, you don't actually say
"black cap", do you? But you don't pronounce
it as if there were only one c, either. You
don't say "blacap". What do you say? You say
"black cap". Now, what are you doing when
you do that? What you are doing is – and
I want you to try it for yourself. Try saying"black cap".
Mmm, a little bit louder, please.
I didn't quite hear you. Yes, that's right.
Well, now try to sense what you are doing
while you do it. What you do is, you start,
you say "bla..." – and you form that k in your
mouth, don't you? The back of your tongue
comes up to make that k but you don't pull
the trigger on it. You pause a little bit,
and then you pull the trigger on the second k sound. Right? Let's try another one: "hot tar".
"Hot tar". Again, unless we are speaking
very carefully, as I was then, we don't normally
say "hot tar". But we don't say "hotar" as
if there was only one t. We do just what we
did before. We say "hot tar". And how do we
do that? Once again, we form the first t – put
your tongue into the position to make a t
but you don't pull the trigger on it. You
wait a minute and then you say the second
t. And that is how you pronounce small tsu
in Japanese. Once you know how to do that,
I don't think you'll find any difficulty.
If you enjoyed this lesson, I think you might like my book "Unlocking Japanese".
And if you have any questions or comments, please put them in the comments below
and I will be happy to answer.  Thank you for attending this lesson. Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.