 
Hello, pretty peoples. KawaJapa no Kyua Dorii desu.
I am Cure Dolly from KawaJapa.
Today we are going to talk about the te-form of verbs.
Last week we showed how all the so-called conjugations are very, very easily formed
once we know the principle underlying them that the textbooks never seem to mention.
This time we are going to look at the te-form.
Once you know the te-form, you also know the ta-form because they are formed identically.
And once you know the information that I taught you last week, together with the information
that I am going to teach you this week, you are armed to make all the possible transformations
that a Japanese verb can make.
The te-form looks a little bit complicated at first, but it's actually really very simple
once you understand it.
In all cases, we cut off the last kana, which is always a u-row kana.
Because all verbs, as we explained before, end with an u-row kana, and they only end
with a limited number of possible u-kana.
So, godan verbs have five kinds of possible ending – that's why they're called godan
verbs: five-level verbs.
And although that seems a little bit difficult, it really isn't.
We can combine two of the levels anyway, because they are so close that we only need to learn them once.
And I'm going to go through the main groups.
The first group is what I call the UTSURU verbs.
Those are the verbs ending in -u, -tsu and -ru.
The word utsuru in Japanese – if you don't know it now is a good time to learn it – utsuru means
to move from one thing to another, and that's exactly what we're doing here –
moving our verbs from one type to another.
So the verbs which end in -u, -tsu and -ru all transform in the same way to the te-form.
We take off the -u, the -tsu or the -ru, and we replace it with a small -tsu plus te
(or ta in the ta-form).
So warau, laugh, becomes waratte; motsu, hold, becomes motte, and toru, take, becomes totte.
Now, you'll notice that utsuru has tsu in the middle.
And the te-form of the utsuru verbs is formed by using a small tsu plus that te.
It's the only group that has tsu in it, and it's the only group that has a tsu in the te-form ending.
So it's really easy to remember.
The second group is what I call the NEW BOOM group.
In Japanese when something is really taking off, when it's becoming popular
we call it a ブーム (BUUMU).
That's an English word, isn't it?
Buumu, a New Buumu!
So, this group I call the New Boom group because there isn't a Japanese word that you can make
out of nu, bu and mu that I know of, and what I want you to notice about this group of verbs
is that they all end in what I would call a dull sound – nu, mu, bu.
It's not a sharp sound like su, tsu, ku, and it's not a neutral sound like ru or u.
It's a dull sound – nu, bu, mu.
And this is important because the ending is also a dull sound.
The te-form ending is -nde, the ta-form is -nda.
So shinu, the only -nu ending verb, becomes shinde / shinda.
nomu, drink, becomes nonde / nonda; asobu, play, becomes asonde / asonda.
So that's the New Boom group, the dull-ending verbs.
And because only a limited number of the possible kana can be used as a verb ending,
they include all the dull sounds except for gu.
We'll come to that right now.
I told you that two of the groups could be combined, and that is the ku and gu group.
To make the te-form of a ku-ending verb, we cut off the ku and add ite, or -ita in the ta form.
So aruku, walk, becomes aruite / aruita.
Now, if we have a ten-ten on that -ku to make it into a -gu, it's exactly the same,
except that there is also a ten-ten on the te-ending.
So aruku becomes aruite, but oyogu, to swim, becomes oyoide.
But, as you see, the two are more or less identical.
It's just that if there's a ten-ten on the original verb, there's a ten-ten on the te-form too.
Aruku, aruite; oyogu, oyoide.
Now we just have one left, and that is su.
And words ending in -su drop the -su and add -shite.
As you will notice, if you have followed our last lesson, we are just doing that regular
thing of shifting the su kana to its i-row equivalent shi.
So hanasu, talk, becomes hanashite;
the masu helper verb, which turns verbs into formal verbs, in the past tense becomes mashita.
So now we have all the go-dan verbs.
What about the ichidan vebs, the so-called ru-verbs?
Well, as always, as with the so-called conjugations, the ichidan verbs are very very simple.
We just cut off that -ru ending and add -te.
Just -te on its own, or -ta in the ta-form.
So taberu becomes tabete or tabeta.
And that's all there is to the te-form and ta-form.
It may be advisable to watch this lesson one or two times to get the idea firmly fixed,
but once you have it, I think it's very easy to remember.
It should be easy to make the te-form and easy to recognize it when you see it.
Thank you for attending this lesson.
Please remember that the course book for this course
of lessons is "Unlocking Japanese".
You can get it at Amazon
in both Kindle and paperback editions.
And if you have any questions, please ask them
in the Comments below  and I will be happy to answer.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegaishimasu.
Class dismissed.