Konnichiwa.
Today we're going to talk about two things.
We're going to talk about some "zombies" in Japanese.
I sometimes call them "fossils", but we can call them "zombies" -- the living dead -- because
what they actually are is elements of old Japanese that have survived into modern Japanese
but they don't work the way they used to and they don't work quite the way modern Japanese does either.
So they are really the living dead, and we'll talk about a couple of these later on.
First of all, we're going to talk about the kanji for "kiku".
You probably remember that a short time ago I made a video about
the kanji that can be used to represent "miru" (see).
Now, "kiku" also has a group of kanji, this group here.
We all know the main one, the simple one that everybody learns right at the beginning:
an ear in a gate, which represents the gate of perception (to quote William Blake)
that comes in through the ear, the gate of hearing.
And, as you know, this "kiku" translates to at least three different words in English.
It translates to "hear", "listen" and "ask", which are three different concepts in English.
In Japanese, we usually understand from context what's meant,
but if we want to clarify it in writing we can use one of the others.
So let's look at the alternative ways of writing "kiku" and examine their kanji a bit.
First of all there's this one.
Now, this has an ear on the left hand side, and that designates the type of kanji it is.
It tells us that it's to do with hearing.
But what it specifically means is "listen".
The rest of the kanji is number 10, a net and a heart.
We can see this mnemonically if we want to as
throwing out ten nets from the ear to capture audio information and put it into our heart.
Because that's what it's all about. It's about actively listening, capturing information.
Now interestingly, just as with "miru", the actual fundamental concept of hearing
is not represented by the simple basic kanji, it's represented by one of the others.
With "miru" it's represented by this one, and its on-reading is "shi",
so we have "shikaku", which is the sense of sight,
and "shiryoku", which is the power of sight, one's eyesight or vision, one's ability to see.
The on-reading of this kanji is "chou" and, just as with "shi",
"choukaku", which is the sense of hearing
and "chouryoku", which is the power of hearing, one's individual hearing, one's ability to hear.
We have the two together in some words,
such as "shichousha" which in English means a viewer of a video or a television program or something,
but in Japanese it's rather more precisely put as a viewer-and-listener,
someone who both watches and listens to a video or whatever.
The number of views I get on my videos is called in Japanese, "shichoukaisuu",
that's to say, the number of times it's been watched-and-listened-to.
Any other compound words where the "chou" on-reading is being used, it refers to active listening.
So, for example, "choukou" is listening to a lecture, listening to a talk or something like that --
there again the assumption of actively and consciously listening to something, not just hearing it.
The other kanji for "kiku" is this one, and this doesn't have an ear on the side, it has a word on the side.
And that's quite logical because what it means is "ask", and you don't ask with your ears; you ask with words.
The other part of the kanji originally meant "speed", but we can if we want see it as a desk.
It has a bit of paper falling off it, so if you want a mnemonic, you could say
the piece of paper falls off the desk and obviously you ask "Where did that piece of paper get to?"
Well, it's a mnemonic, you can take it or leave it. It wasn't that bad.
So if you specifically want to say "ask", this is the form of "kiku" you use.
The on-reading is actually "jin", but you probably don't need to worry about it very much.
When it's not in "kiku", it's an alternate form of this kanji, which is "tazuneru".
We can write "tazuneru" like this or like that, and we can use it in other combinations
such as "jinmon" (questioning), which can be written with a "tazuneru" kanji or this kanji.
The on-reading in both cases is "jin" and they really don't mean anything particularly different,
so they're just alternatives, and most of the time you'll actually see the "tazuneru" kanji.
Now, let's turn to those zombies.
In Japanese there are some words and verbal elements that are left over from old Japanese.
One of the ones you hear all the time is the "sen" of "masen",
which is the negative form of the "masu" helper verb.
As we know, usually negatives are formed by attaching the helper adjective "nai",
but with "masu" we suddenly get this "sen" stuck onto the end of it,
and not even onto one of its proper stems.
And what is "sen"?
Is it a verb? It can't be, it doesn't end in -u.
Is it an adjective? It doesn't end in -i.
Is it a noun? Well, it doesn't work like a noun.
So, we're all familiar with that one.
But here are a couple more that you may not be familiar with and could puzzle you a bit if you see them.
They are "nu" and "zu", and both of these are negatives.
How do they work?
Well, "nu" is essentially something from older Japanese that works
the same way that "nai" works in modern Japanese.
You put it onto the a-stem of a verb and we have a negative.
So, we can say "wakaranai" or "wakaranu"; "hashiranai" or "hashiranu"; "tabenai" or  "tabenu".
It's really as simple as that.
The peculiar thing about it is this: one of my commenters recently asked
"But what kind of words are these "nu" and "zu"?
Are they verbs? Are they adjectives? What are they?
And if they're verbs, which is what they look like because they at least belong to the u-row,
do they modulate, do they have a te-form, do they have a ta-form?"
And the answer to that is, in modern Japanese, no, they don't really.
You're only going to see them in their plain, simple form, "nu" and "zu".
And this is really quite aberrant for modern Japanese.
We have verbs that modulate, we have nouns that don't modulate.
We don't have these strange things that look like verbs and used to be verbs but now don't modulate.
Still, it's easy enough to use. You just put it on in exactly the same way you would use "nai".
You probably won't be using it, because it's not used much in regular conversation.
It's rather archaic.
You will come across it in anime and manga and other kinds of writing.
And as "nu" works like "nai", "zu" works like "naide", the irregular te-form of "nai".
It also attaches, of course, to the a-stem like "nai" and "nu".
And it doesn't mean that "naide" that can be a command or a suggestion, like "nakanaide" (don't cry).
It's only the "naide" that means "do B without doing A",
for example, "tabenaide neta" (I went to sleep without eating).
We can also say "tabezu neta" and it means that same thing: "I went to bed without eating."
The interesting thing here is that while it's often used in exactly that way,
it can also be used with -ni, so we could say "tabezu-ni neta".
And the thing you're probably going to ask there is:
"Well, I thought that logical particles like -ni can only be attached to nouns".
And that's right, they can only be attached to nouns.
So why are we seeing it attached to "zu" here?
Well, the answer is that "zu" and "nu" don't work like verbs.
They don't work like adjectives either.
They don't modulate, so they're not, in modern Japanese, "yougen", which is active, modulating words.
They're "taigen", like nouns.
They don't really belong in modern Japanese.
They're zombies. They're fossils.
And because "zu" works like a "taigen", a noun, it's sometimes treated as if it were one.
Since it's adverbial, it can be treated as if were an adverbial noun --
and I did a video on the three different kinds of special noun
of which the last one I dealt with was adverbial (or "foxy nouns", as I called them)
and what happens with these is that we can make any appropriate noun into an adverbial by adding -ni,
but with adverbial nouns we don't need to add the -ni, but we can.
Sometimes we do, sometimes we don't.
And that's exactly how "zu" gets treated,
because it's not a functional verb, it's a zombie that doesn't modulate.
If you have any questions or comments,
please put them in the Comments below and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons, my producer-angels, who make these videos possible,
and all my dear patrons and supporters on Patreon and everywhere.
I've had so much support and love from all of you patrons and fans and subscribers and everybody,
as well as the odd person who calls me a creepy android with a weird voice.
But what I am doesn't matter.
What matters is that we're cutting a path through the jungles of Japanese
and making this beautiful language our own.
And I'd like to thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.