Konnichiwa. Today we're going to talk about
the core fundamental structure of Japanese
and a problem that troubles some people about it, 
which I've tried to lay to rest but there's still some difficulty,
I think, so I'm going to try to tackle the question, 
for what I hope will be the last time, today.
And in doing that we're going to look at a puzzle 
that's posed by the title of a very popular work.
It's been a manga, an anime, a live-action movie:
"Kimi-no suizou-wo tabetai",
which means literally "I want to eat your pancreas",
and we'll talk about why it literally means that in a minute.
I didn't actually know what a pancreas was.
I thought it was a railway station in London.
But apparently it's a component that you find inside 
the human body and things don't go so well without it.
I'm not very clear on what you find when 
you take off the front and back panels of a human body,
so we learn something new every day!
That's why this is classified as an educational channel, I suppose.
So, the question that will be raised by this title
in the minds of anybody who's got some grasp
of the real structure of Japanese, is: 
Why is the particle -wo, rather than the particle-ga, used here?
If we want to say what in English would be
"I want to eat that bread" or "I want to eat
that cake", we would say "pan-ga tabetai",
"keeki-ga tabetai".
And, as we see, the adjective "tai", the adjective
of desire "tai", is pointing not at me but
at the cake.
The cake carries the ga-particle, so that
is what the adjective is describing.
And confusion ensues when we actually translate
this as literally meaning "I want to eat cake",
because that's not what it means.
It means "cake is want-inducing (to me)".
But we also know that this adjective of subjectivity,
like other adjectives of subjectivity,
like "kowai" (frightening), and also potentials
like "dekiru" or "taberareru" -- 
because potential is also a kind of subjectivity.
It's something peculiar to the individual,
whether they can or can't do a particular thing.
It's not inherent in the thing itself.
That would be "kanousei".
We know that all of these generally point
at the thing that's possible, the thing that
induces the desire to eat, the thing that's
scary, etc.
But also the polarity can be flipped.
And it's flipped particularly when there isn't
an actual cause, an actual visible or
tangible cause of the subjectivity.
So if we say, "o-naka-ga suita hayaku tabetai",
we're saying "Tummy is empty, I want to eat soon".
Now that "tai" is pointing at me, not at any
particular thing, like cake or anything else.
Now, this is the point that a few people have
actually resisted and said, "Well, can't we
say that it's not really saying 'I want to 
eat', it's saying 'food in general is making
me want to eat'?"
Well, it isn't actually.
It's your empty tummy that's making you want
to eat.
And we're going to look at some constructions
today, and the one we've just talked about
is one of them, that make it a 100% clear
that not only in cases where there isn't a
cause of the subjectivity, but in some cases
where there is, the adjective of subjectivity
can still flip its polarity.
Now, why do people resist this idea?
As a matter of fact, it's not unknown even
in English.
We can say "We were happy that day", in which
case the adjective "happy" is pointing at us
(we're the ones that were happy) or we
can say "That was a happy day", and now the
adjective of subjectivity is pointing at the
day, which is the cause of our happiness.
We can say "I am suspicious of her behavior"
and the adjective "suspicious" is pointing at me
(I'm the one who's suspicious) or "her
behavior is suspicious", and now the adjective
"suspicious" is pointing at her behavior as
the cause of my subjectivity.
So this isn't something that doesn't happen,
even in English.
For the reason, I think, that people become so
agitated about this and so determined to find
quite unlikely ways of wriggling out of it
is perfectly understandable.
It's because they may have spent months or
even years in this terribly confusing world
where particles just change their meaning
depending on which side of bed
they got out of that morning.
So, "-ga usually marks the subject of a sentence
but it can also mark the object of a sentence
as in 'pan-ga tabetai', in which obviously
the bread isn't the subject of the sentence;
it's me, 'I want to eat bread'."
Well, we know that this isn't the case.
We know that in those cases it's the bread
that's the subject;
it's the bread that's making me want to eat.
And if we start saying "That the polarity
can flip, doesn't that either break the model
of Japanese structure that gets rid of all
these ambiguities or introduce new ambiguities
so, ooh there are special rules that sometimes
it points this way and sometimes it points
that way", well, the answer to that is no,
it doesn't matter to the model.
It's quite irrelevant to the model.
Whether we choose to say "pan-ga tabetai"
(bread is making me want to eat) or 
"pan-wo tabetai" (I want to eat bread) doesn't matter.
The only thing that matters to the model is
that the particles are always doing the same thing.
If we say "pan-ga tabetai", we're saying the
bread is making me want to eat.
If we say "pan-wo tabetai", we're saying that
I want to eat bread.
And the model doesn't care which way we say
it.
The model is doing the same thing either way.
All the particles are doing exactly the same
thing.
Now, can we justify this grammatically?
So if we say, for example, "pan-wo tabetai",
surely the problem here is that with "tai"
we have an adjective, so we have an adjectival
sentence, and an adjective,
as we know, can't take a direct object.
So how can we say "pan-wo tabetai"?
And the answer to this is really very simple.
Japanese, as we know, is very adept at gluing
verbal elements together to make them into
one element or taking them apart at will.
And what's going on in a sentence like "pan-wo
tabetai" is that "tai" is no longer being
attached simply to the verb "taberu".
We're not saying "pan-wo" and then "tabetai",
we're saying "pan-wo tabe..."
and "tai" is being attached to that entire unit.
What we want is the action "pan-wo taberu",
so we can attach the "tai" to that entire unit.
That's what makes sense of these constructions.
And while "pan-wo tabetai" is a less common
way of putting it, and in general "naninani-wo
tabetai" is the less common way of putting
it, there are some kinds of sentence in which
it is the one that we always use.
For example, "tasuketai" (want to help) or
"mamoritai" (want to defend).
We don't say "Sakura-ga mamoritai", we say
"Sakura-wo mamoritai".
And if we're talking about "seigi" (justice)
or "heiwa" (peace)
or even "kuni" (country), it's the same.
We don't say Sakura is making me want to defend
her, we don't say the country is making me
want to defend it, we don't say justice is
making me want to defend it, or peace is making
me want to defend it. We always say "I want
to defend Sakura", "I want to defend justice",
"I want to defend peace", "I want to defend
the country". Why is that?
Well, essentially I think the reason is that
we are not talking about an impulse desire.
If we look at bread and we want to eat it,
"ah, pan-ga tabetai" 
(bread's making me want to eat it).
But we're talking here about things that are
more abstract, things that are less impulsive.
And in the case of people, it's more respectful
to say "Sakura-wo mamoritai" than "Sakura-ga
mamoritai", because we're not saying that
Sakura is an object that makes me want to
defend her, like a piece of bread that we
might want to eat, we're saying that the action
of defending her is something I want to do,
which is more dignified in the case of a person.
But in the case of, say, the country, or peace,
or justice, or even a house or a park,
we're talking about something less impulsive and
more a decision of our own,
if not a conscious decision, then a mindset,
a way of thinking that is ours.
So we talk about that action as our own rather
than something induced by the external cause.
If we do say "pan-wo tabetai", this is likely
to be in conditions where we're talking a little 
bit more generally, we're not talking about that
particular lovely smell of bread by which
the bread is making us want to eat it.
We're not talking about some candy we've just
seen that's making us want to eat it.
We're talking about the general desire to
eat bread.
So we're more likely to say "pan-wo tabetai
toki" (when I want to eat bread) 
than "pan-ga tabetai toki" (when bread  
makes me want to eat it).
And this isn't a firm and definite rule but
this is the kind of tendency, 
the kind of reason, the nuance, which
decides which way
we're likely to flip that adjective of desire,
in this case, "tai".
So if we come back to "Kimi-no suizou-wo tabetai",
why is -wo being used here?
Well, essentially because again this is not an impulse eat.
We're not looking at the girl's pancreas and
thinking how delicious it is.
That would be rather hard to do anyway.
Something subtler, something more abstract,
something deeper, is being talked about here,
the desire for some emotional and quite complex
reason to eat somebody's pancreas.
So I hope this time we really laid to rest
the final question of polarity switching.
It does not threaten the model.
And it does happen.
And it happens for reasons which are a little
subtle, that will probably take time to ingest
and immersion to ingest, because you can't
learn everything through raw structure.
If you have any questions or comments, please
put them in the Comments below 
and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons
and all my patrons and supporters,
who make these videos possible.
And I'd like to thank you for attending this
lesson.
Once again, I'm so happy that so many of you
support this channel.
One of my commenters pointed out recently
that while the channel is still pretty small
in terms of subscribers and views and things
like that and is outpaced many times over
by channels that simply rehash the conventional
view, the engagement of this channel is many,
many times higher than most of those channels.
More of you become patrons, more of you comment,
more of you "like" the videos.
So we have a small but dedicated group here,
and I think that's kind of natural because
we're doing something very radical and it
takes time for radical things to catch on.
And it's not as if I have a winning personality
to bring you all into the fold.
I'm perfectly well aware that my personality
and charisma are on the level of a budget toaster.
But that's all right. I love you all and I think
some of you love me.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.