Hello, pretty peoples.
KawaJapa no Kyua Dorii desu. I am Cure Dolly from
KawaJapa. In our last mini-lesson we talked about the basic functions of the no particle.
This time we're going to talk about what the textbooks call the nominalizing function – that is, when no
turns a phrase or a word
into a
noun. Let's take a very simple example. I told you that no
fundamentally is equivalent to the English 's. Well, if we say
"Mary's hat is red" and
you reply
"Sakura's is blue", that's exactly the same in English and Japanese. In Japanese
we would say "Sakura no ga aoi" –
"Sakura's is blue."
So what's actually going on here?
"Sakura's is blue" is actually short for something, isn't it? We mean Sakura's one is blue, Sakura's thing is blue,
Sakura's hat is blue. So we are using a kind of pronoun here, but it's
concealed. "Sakura's is blue" – Sakura's
what? Well, we know from context that we're talking about hats and their color.
So we know that what's meant here is "Sakura's hat is blue".
We could treat this if we want to as another zero pronoun: "Sakura no zero
ga aoi". And
this in fact is just what the Japanese textbooks for Japanese children
teach – that it's really short for "Sakura no mono". I think
it's better to say "Sakura no zero" because that fits all cases more easily.
So let's take a more complex example.
"Anime wo miru no ga tanoshii." Now, this is what's really called nominalizing in the textbooks.
We take "anime wo miru", which is an activity –
watching anime –
and we're turning it into a noun, just as the phrase "watching anime " does in English.
We can say "I like watching anime".  "Watching anime" has become a noun, hasn't it? To watch anime is an activity, but
watching anime in the sense of "I like watching anime" – that's turned into an noun.
"Anime wo miru no" does exactly the same thing, and what the textbooks tell you is that you have turned
"anime wo miru" into a noun just as "watching anime" is a noun in English – and
once again that's not quite what's happening. We are trying to describe Japanese as if it were English.
Actually, no is working as or, strictly, concealing a pronoun.
We don't have to keep thinking "anime no  zero"
if we don't want to, but if we don't we have to see that a pronoun is there. And the
easiest way to see this is simply to remember that it is "anime no zero" – "anime no [something]", so in this case
it's "the thing of watching anime is fun".
The structure of this sentence is
"zero ga
tanoshii".
"Anime wo miru no" is
simply defining that zero pronoun and telling us more about it.
Now, this may seem like
splitting hairs. We can just say, can't we, that  "anime wo miru no"
becomes a noun,
like the English
"Watching anime is fun" –
"Watching anime" has become a noun. But that isn't precisely how it's working,  and the reason it's important to know that
is not that it going to cause any problems at this stage, when you're dealing with very simple sentences,
but that later on it may become much more
complicated. Instead of saying "Watching anime is fun", we may be saying something like
"Watching anime on a warm summer afternoon
when the sun's just starting to go down and you've had a few drinks is fun".
Now, in Japanese, all the rest of that sentence is going to go behind
the no. All of it is going to be a modifier, a kind of adjective
for the zero pronoun which is implied by the no.
And if we understand that, it is going to be much much much much easier to understand the sentence.
We are going to be able to look at it, and say, what is the subject of
this sentence? What is the thing that's doing or being something?
Well, here we have "no ga tanoshii", so no is implying a
zero pronoun,
and that is the subject of the sentence. "No ga tanoshii" – something is being fun.
What is that something?
Well, we look back at all this stuff sitting behind the no to find out.
But when we know that, we know how the sentence is structured and we can easily work out
what it all means.
Please remember that the course book for this course of lessons is "Unlocking Japanese".
You can get it in paperback or electronic editions,
and you'll find links in the information section below. If you have comments or questions,
please ask them in the comments below and I will answer.
Thank you once again for attending this lesson. Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegaishimasu.
Class dismissed.