Hello, pretty peoples.
KawaJapa no Kyua Dorii desu. I am Cure Dolly from
KawaJapa. Today's lesson is going to be a little shorter than usual because I am in Japan.
I'm not in Japan as I speak but by the time you hear this, I will be.  And when I'm in Japan
I cannot speak English because I take my English-speaking
circuits out and leave them in a little box at the
airport.
I imagine you've done similar things yourself – oh, you're human, aren't you?  I'm sorry. However, if you wish
to ask questions in the comments below
please feel free to do so, as I am able to write English for a short period in the day.
Today we are going to talk about the no particle in its fundamental
functions.
The no particle, as I've said before, has a direct equivalent in English, which is
's. It is the possessive
marker just as 's is in English. So we can say
"Sakura no boushi"
or
"Mary's hat" and they both mean the same thing. And once you know that
you really know what you need to know about the no
particle, but
people will say that there are some occasions, aren't there, when it doesn't seem to be doing exactly that.
Well, let's take a look at some of them. At the beginning of every lesson, I say
"KawaJapa no Kyua Dorii desu" and
that means "I am Cure Dolly from KawaJapa".
What it literally means is "I am KawaJapa's Cure Dolly". In other words,
"I belong to KawaJapa"  – and
this is exactly what we say in English with a club, isn't it? "I belong to the Cabbage-Planting Club".
We could also say this with a company that you are employed by, or a place that you come from,
or anything like that.
So this is very similar to
English usage, isn't it?
"KawaJapa no Cure Dolly " – KawaJapa  is what I belong to
just as the hat is what belongs to Mary.  Now, if we want to say
"Felix the cat", we would say "neko no Felix".
And that literally means, doesn't it,  "cat's Felix"
So why do we say that? What we are really saying is "Felix who belongs to the class, cat".
So it's just like "KawaJapa no Kyua Dorii". And
this function
continues to be extended towards other objects
and it's what gives no its quality of turning a noun into an adjective. For
example, if you want to say "magic wand" in English you just put the noun that is becoming an adjective in front of the noun it is
modifying. But in Japanese we would use no. We say "mahou no tsue" and
that literally means "magic's wand". What does it mean? It means "wand that
belongs to the class of magic things".
So if we say
"Zelda no densetsu",
which is the title of a very famous game series,
we're saying "The legend of Zelda", or literally we're saying "Zelda's legend",  which makes perfect sense, doesn't it?
We can also say
"densetsu no
senshi", which means "legendary warrior" and
here, as I imagine you will already have grasped, what we are doing is saying "warrior
who belongs to the class of legendary things or legendary people". Who belongs to the legendary class, the legend class.
So that really is all you need to know about the basic function of
no. It's not doing several different things when it turns a noun into an adjective and when it describes Mary's hat. It's
doing something very similar and closely related.
Now we also have what is called in Japanese the nominalizing no.
The way the textbooks put it is
that it can turn a
sentence into a noun – a clause or sentence or a phrase into a
noun. That isn't precisely what it does although it's close enough, and
this is
taught by the textbooks as if it were a completely different function of no, but in fact it isn't.
It's really doing something that is a very slight extension of what we've been talking about today.
And that is what I'm going to tell you about
next time.
If you want to know more about how Japanese is really structured, we recommend "Unlocking Japanese",
which is available at Amazon in both paperback and Kindle editions.
Thank you for attending this mini lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegaishimasu.
Class dismissed.