Konnichiwa.
Today we're going to talk about kanji, how they fit together, how they work,
and I think we're going to get a few insights that will be rather helpful.
Some people sometimes worry that there are a number of words written in kanji
that have exactly the same pronunciation.
This is quite a common phenomenon in Japanese and I think this is a worry particular to beginners
and to people who've done a lot of study but not very much actual immersion,
so they have all these abstract words piled up
and they're not aware of the fact that in actual use they're not a problem.
When you're trying to memorize them off lists, they are a problem.
And I've done a video about how we can actually use this phenomenon
of Japanese homophones to our advantage.
But only if we're actually doing immersion.
Now, a phenomenon that people talk about much less frequently
is what we might call the equal and opposite phenomenon
that there are quite a lot of words in Japanese that are the same word
and are pronounced the same but have different kanji.
And we find this not just with obscure words but very common words.
Words like "miru" (look) and "kiku" (hear) have one commonly known kanji and then
two or three others that are used quite frequently for the same word.
So, first of all, let's ask ourselves why this happens.
Well, in these cases, it's nearly always going to be the kun-reading of the word,
that's to say, the native Japanese reading.
So what's happened is, not that the word's been taken in from China
and given a reading approximate to its original Chinese reading,
but it's a word that existed in Japanese before Chinese characters ever came to Japan
and as in most cases a kanji is attached to the native Japanese word,
but in some cases more than one kanji is attached to the same Japanese word.
Why would that happen? Well, it happens because, as I explained before,
words do not represent a single point on the meaning spectrum.
They represent a range within the meaning spectrum.
And that's why it's really quite rare to find a Japanese word that corresponds exactly
to the supposed English translation word that the dictionaries give,
because while they may overlap, and often overlap to a very large extent,
very rarely do they cover exactly the same section of the meaning spectrum.
Now, when more than one kanji is applied to the same word,
usually what's happening is that the different shadings of the meaning spectrum
are being expressed by the different kanji.
This gives us a way in writing to stress particular nuances and aspects of the word.
And this phenomenon can be separated into two types.
There's a type like the "see" and "hear" kanji in which all the meanings overlap in the basic, central kanji,
so we're really talking about the same word and then some nuances.
And then there's the type where they don't actually overlap at all.
An example of this is the word "atsui".
There are three kanji for "atsui":
one that means a hot thing, "hot" as in a "hot object";
one that means "hot " as in "hot weather" or a "hot day";
and one that actually means "thick" or "fat" or "kind".
Now, these three don't overlap at all.
It would actually be a mistake to use the hot-thing one when you're talking about hot weather
or the thick-and-fat one when you're talking about a hot day.
It would in fact be possible to argue that these are three different words with the same pronunciation.
It would be one of those rather pointless arguments that you couldn't prove
one way or the other and wouldn't really matter if you could.
But the point is that you could theoretically make that argument
that you have three different words pronounced "atsui".
Now, the other and commoner kind is like, as I've said, the words for "see" or "hear",
and we have this same phenomenon in quite a number of words,
where there's one central, simple kanji, the one that children learn first in school,
the one that you probably know if you don't know a lot of kanji, and then there are the other two.
The one simple, central one can in most cases be used for all the meanings.
The others are kind of optional when we want to stress a particular aspect.
And we're going to take as our example case here what I call "the three wakarus".
Some rather silly people liken them to an Australian circus act called "The Three Wakaroos"
-- who did that?
And they look like this.
Now, each of them is a way of writing the word "wakaru",
the basic meaning of which is "do clear" or "do understandable".
You can't translate it directly into English, because in English you can't "do understandable",
but in Japanese you can. It's a verb.
It doesn't of course mean "understand", so the vandals who tell you that
"hon-ga wakaru" means "I understand the book" are really setting dynamite
under your understanding of Japanese and its particles.
"Hon-ga wakaru" -- obviously, it's the book that's doing something
and what it's doing is the act of understandability in relation to you.
And this one, as is usual with these groups with one simple central kanji and other kanji,
the basic kanji can be and is used for any of the whole range of meanings,
but the other two are used for specific areas.
So, the basic kanji is this one. As you see,
it's made up of a sword, the simple kanji element for "sword", dividing something into two.
Its fundamental meaning is "separate" or "divide".
It's the word for "minute", because a minute is the basic division of time.
And with that on-reading "fun", it's actually a Sound Sister,
so if we see this "fun" element inside another, more complex kanji,
we'll know that the on-reading of that kanji is probably going to be "fun" or "bun".
Now, there are two variants on this. The first is this one.
And if we look at it we can see that it's actually fundamentally,
in terms of its symbolism, the same as the first one.
We have the element that means a sword or a knife
and the element that means halving or dividing in two.
The on-reading of this element is "han"
and we know this easily enough because the left-hand element is actually a Sound Sister,
so anything with this in is likely to have the on-reading "han".
The implication when we use this kanji for "wakaru" is the idea of judgment.
And we can see this in the kanji itself as well.
We have the long sword and the dividing in half.
It's used in words like "handan", which means "judgment".
So, where we're talking about "wakaru" in a way that implies judgment,
such as "hannin-ga wakaru" (the criminal has become known / the criminal has been discerned/determined),
this is the one we're going to use if we don't use the base one.
We can use the base one, but if we want to stress this element of judgment,
of having arrived at a conclusion from evidence, this is the one to use.
Now, the other one is this one.
And let's notice that the sword is in all three of them.
In the upper right hand corner we have the sword again, but this one has the on-reading "kai"
and we know it from words like "rikai", which means "understand".
That's the word you have to use if you really want to say "understand",
because "wakaru" doesn't mean understand, it means "do understandable".
This kanji has the general meaning of unravelling or untangling.
"Toku" is to "untangle" or "undo" something.
And if you're fond of puzzles or puzzle games you're probably aware of the word "nazotoki",
which means "puzzle-solving" : "nazo" (puzzle) and "toki" (solving, undoing, unravelling a mystery).
Now, strictly speaking, this is the one we also want
when we're saying that something is "doing understandable".
When we say "nihongo-ga wakaru" (Japanese is understandable [to me]),
if we had to choose one of the two specialized ones, this is the one we would have to use.
If we wanted to make it absolutely clear that we meant "wakaru" in that sense, we would use this one.
Otherwise, most of the time we usually use the regular old "wakaru" kanji
that we all learned at the beginning.
So what about the regular old one -- does that have any special implication?
It's not really possible in the case of these kanji groups where there's one central one
that can be used in place of any of the others and usually is,
it's not possible to say that it has a specific meaning because it has all the meanings.
But when you're differentiating, the base meaning of this one is the meaning which is essentially "do known".
As you know, very often when we say "wakaranai", we mean "I don't know".
When we say "naninani-ga wakaru", we're often asking "Is this known to you?"
So to take an example where we can look at the distinct characteristics of each,
suppose someone were to ask "What is the oldest turtle that has ever lived?" and you answer "Wakaranai".
Now, in this case there can be a confusion over the exact meaning of "wakaranai".
You could mean "I don't know how long a turtle has lived" or "I don't understand the question".
If you could specifically say "wakaranai" with this kanji,
it would be clear that you meant the latter -- "I don't understand the question".
If you answered with this kanji "wakaranai", the implication is
"that is not something on which I'm able to form a judgment."
And if you answer with the base kanji, it would have that base meaning of the word:
simply, "I don't know" -- "I don't know how long a turtle has lived."
In practice, most of the time you're going to be using the base kanji,
but if you're writing you can use one of the others for disambiguation.
And if you're speaking, your tone and general manner is going to tell someone
if you mean that you can't understand what they're talking about.
Now, since the regular one is what's used most of the time,
you might ask, why do we need to know the others?
And the reason is that we will see them pretty often in immersion.
They get used in writing quite a lot of the time.
And in the first place, of course, you want to know what they mean,
you want to know that we are seeing the word "wakaru" here,
or the word "miru" or the word "kiku" or whatever other word it may be.
And then, it's a good idea to know what they mean by using this particular variant of the word,
which is being used for a good reason.
They're trying to tell you something specific by choosing that particular kanji.
So it may be a good idea for us to go into some more of these kanji groups in the future.
If you're interested to hear that, please let me know in the Comments below.
If you have other questions or comments, please put them in the Comments below
and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons, and my Red Kokeshi patrons,
my Pink Kokeshi patrons and my Blue Kokeshi patrons,
all the patrons and supporters who make these videos possible
and help me to keep them free for all of you who can't afford to support me.
And for those of you who can't, thank you for being here,
thank you for subscribing to the channel,
thank you for commenting, thank you for liking,
thank you for doing all the things you're doing to keep this channel going.
And you, sitting there right now, thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.