Minasan, konnichiwa.
Welcome to Anime Club.
Today we are going to talk about “urusai”
which is a word you'll often hear in anime.
If you look it up, you'll probably learn that
it means “shut up”.
And that's partly true.
It does get used in the same kind of circumstances
as we might say "Shut up!" in English – and
other circumstances too.
What does it actually mean?
It means "noisy", and we must remember that
"noise" means unwanted sound.
So if somebody shouts "Urusai!" at another
person, they aren't actually giving them an
order to stop talking, the way "Shut up!"
is in English.
What they are doing is that they are commenting
on what the person is saying or doing, and
of course if you shout it like that – "Urusai!"
– then you're giving a strong hint that
you might prefer the person to shut up.
The second most common way it is in the expression
"urusai na".
Now, that "na" is a marker for talking to
yourself, for a comment addressed to yourself.
So what it means is that you are talking to
yourself, usually for the benefit of the other
person in this case.
So it's a bit like saying "What a noisy person!"
or something rather ruder to the same effect.
But "urusai" gets used in other contexts as
well.
For example, you could call loud traffic
sound "urusai".
You could also say that someone is "urusai"
about her clothes and what you would mean
by that is that she's fussy about them, she
makes too much noise about them.
It doesn't have to mean literal "noise" in
a case like that.
And an interesting thing to notice is that
while "urusai" is always negative, because
it does mean "unwanted sound", it doesn't
necessarily imply criticism.
For example, when I was doing home-stay in
Japan, a typhoon was headed in the direction
of the town I was living in.
The television broadcast continual reports
of the storm and its approach, when it was
expected to hit, and how much rain there was
accompanying it, and all sorts of things like
that.
But in the end the storm changed course and
headed northward toward Tokyo.
And my host-mother said, "Terebi wa urusakatta
ne".
And "urusakatta" is the past form of "urusai",
so what she was saying was "The television
was urusai, wasn't it?"
Now, I don't think she was criticizing the
television in any way.
Obviously the storm was heading in our direction,
and it was the duty of the television to give
as much information as possible about it..
But as it happened the storm never came, so
all that information was unnecessary noise.
In English, she might have said, "Well, that
was a big fuss about nothing, wasn't it?"
But she wasn't saying that the television
was doing anything wrong – she was just
commenting on the nature of the sound that
it was making.
Now, as well as hearing "Urusai!" shouted
in an angry manner, you might also hear "Yurusanai!"
shouted in a very similar manner, and because
they sound similar you might think the two
words are somewhat the same or related, but
in fact they are very, very different words
with very, very different meanings.
And we'll talk about "yurusanai" at the next
meeting of the Anime Club.
If you want to know more about Japanese words,
may I recommend my book "Alice in Kanji Land".
It's not just a book about kanji; it's an
introduction to the Japanese language.
A very good place to start if you want to
know whether you really want to plunge in
and learn this beautiful language.
Thank you for attending this meeting of the
Anime Club.
If you have any questions, please feel free
to ask them in the comments below, and I will
answer.
And please feel free to subscribe to this
channel.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Kaisan desu.