Konnichiwa. Today we're going to talk about 
kanji and when not to use them.
Some learners of Japanese tend to write very 
strange Japanese because they use
far too many kanji. They write simple 
words like "arigatou" like this.
And if you've read much Japanese at all, 
I think that probably looks weird to you already.
Organic learners who learn kanji as part of words,  
in context, are less prone to this problem
than, say, people who do Heisig and learn   
a lot of kanji in the abstract.
But it's still worth getting an idea of the 
principles behind when kanji are used
and when they're not normally used.  Most 
Japanese people like a balance of kanji and kana.
and you probably do too if you've gotten used 
to Japanese at all. For example, if you go
to one of those old Pokemon games which 
are written entirely in kana (with spaces),
you probably find it hard to read, maybe 
so hard that you give up on it.
It's just tiring and difficult to read text 
that's written entirely in kana.
On the other hand, if far too many kanji 
are used, that's tiring too.
And it's not just you that experiences it 
that way. Japanese people do too.
They like a balance between kanji and kana. 
But there are quite a few cases where kanji
are very rarely used except under certain 
circumstances. One of them is light novels.
Some light novels, not all, but some light novels  
use far more kanji than most Japanese writing.
For example, they'll write "mata" like this, which 
is uncommon but not unheard of.
They'll also write "hazu" like this, which really  
is a bit strange and probably
gives most Japanese readers pause. 
Why do they do this in light novels?
Well, light novels are directed at middle 
school and high school students,
and you have this phenomenon which is called "chuunibyou" in Japanese,
which means "second-year-of-middle-
school sickness",
and the symptoms of this sickness are things
like thinking you have magic powers --
I know some of you do, but these people 
brag about it.
I know you keep it quiet if you've   
got magic powers, don't you? --
thinking you've got magic powers and using
too many kanji. There are other symptoms too,
but those are two of the big ones.
Why do they use too many kanji?
Well, in three years of "chuugaku" (middle 
school) you learn as many kanji
as you did in six years of  "shougaku" 
(elementary school).
This means you're really cramming kanji, 
and you want to use them.
And at that age it seems kind of sophisticated 
and clever to use kanji for just about anything
that you can use kanji for. So in a way these 
people are writing a bit like Heisigers.
The only difference is that they actually know  
they're overusing kanji while the Heisigers do it
quite innocently because they've no idea. The 
trouble with doing this is it does look strange.
It's not the usual way people write Japanese.
They'll write it off to the fact that
you're a foreigner,  but it's not very natural
usage.
Now, there are some other places where
you'll see more kanji than usual being used.
One is in television captions -- you know, 
those big captions they put over
Japanese television shows. They will sometimes 
use more kanji than normal because often
kanji replace two or three kana and so it  
just makes them more compact,
you can have the captions bigger or 
taking up less room on the screen.
In Twitter sometimes if someone 
makes a long tweet they might
use some unusual kanji just to cut down the 
character count and get it inside the limit.
And some people use them for being very formal,
so you might see some people writing
"arigatou" like this when they're being  
extremely formal.
 It's not the way most people write
"arigatou" most of the  time
even when they're using desu/masu language, 
but if someone's trying to be extra formal they
might do it. So how do we know when not to use 
kanji? Well, first of all, most dictionaries
that have English in will also have a code like 
"UK" which stands for "usually kana / usually
written in kana" -- bit confusing because it could 
mean "usually written in kanji" but it doesn't,
it means "usually written in kana", and if you see 
this you know that the word is mostly written in
kana and you will tend to write it in kana. You'll 
also tend to encounter it in kana. Now this is a
bit of a blunt instrument obviously, because 
it ranges from words that are written in kanji
less than half to time to ones that are 
almost never written in kanji.
But you'll always be safe writing one 
of these words in kana.
 Also when words are attached to other
 words with the te-form
they're very often written in kana. Now, this 
varies according to the word, so for example
"motteiku" is written probably about as often
with kana used for the "iku" as without it.
"Mottekuru", on the other hand, is almost always 
written with the "kuru" in kana.
When "miru"  is added to a word to say 
"do it and see", like "tabetemiru" (eat it and see,
try eating it),  that "miru" is almost never written  
like this. It's usually written in kana.
Now, we don't have to learn all these instances. 
We get used to, from reading Japanese and
using Japanese, when it looks normal to use 
kanji and when it looks a bit strange.
And there's a lot of middle ground where 
 it really doesn't matter.
On the whole, if it says in your dictionary 
"usually written in kana", then
in the very early stages you don't even 
need to learn the kanji.
Now, some old-school learning types and   
 AJATTers etc. would say,
"Oh, well, you need to learn the kanji because
 sometimes you're going to see it."
Well, with Organic Japanese we have the 
dynamic cards concept,
so there's nothing to stop you learning the 
word first of all without the kanji
and then adding the kanji to your card 
at a later stage and recycling it.
This is worth doing because kanji tend to be
harder to learn in the early stage,
Once you're used to them and you're used 
to all the elements of kanji,
it's much easier to add them to a word you 
already know later, recycle that word,
and it'll go away pretty quickly because you   
already know half of it.
If it doesn't, then obviously you needed the 
extra practice.
And generally speaking, words that mostly aren't 
written in kanji, you don't need to learn in kanji.
That means you won't use them in kanji 
and you'll never look strange because even
if they are sometimes used in kanji there's 
nothing unusual about writing them in kana.
In the end, there's no substitute for simply reading 
a lot of Japanese and getting used to
when words are written in kanji and when 
they're not written in kanji,
but this is something that happens pretty  
quickly and naturally.
You start to see, "Oh, that looks a bit strange. 
People don't usually write that in kanji." 
But on the whole, when in doubt, 
err on the side of kana.
You'll have plenty of kanji that you're learning  
and incorporating into your writing,
and the ones that are doubtful, if you write them 
in kana, you'll almost never look strange.
If you write them in kanji and they're really 
not usually written in kanji in that context,
then they will look strange.
If you have any questions or comments, please 
put them in the Comments below
and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons, my 
producer-angels, who make these videos possible,
and all my producer-angels on Patreon and 
everywhere who support this channel
and make this adventure possible, getting 
away from the old-fashioned rote learning
(which funnily enough affects modern movements
like AJATT almost as much as it affects the
old textbook schools) and learning Japanese in 
context as a living language, as it really is.
Thank you. Let's go forward together. 
Ganbarimashou!
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.