Konnichiwa.
Today we're going to talk about something
that some people have been talking to me about
ever since I started this channel, and one
sees serious and semi-serious articles about
the subject, usually written by foreigners,
warning the Japanese about the terrible danger
to their language of the influx of English
into it and worrying that the Japanese
don't seem to be aware of the damage 
that this could do to the language 
and the ways in which it could 
make it less Japanese.
So today I want to look at what's 
actually going on here 
and what is likely to happen
and what is unlikely to happen.
First of all, it's absolutely true to say
that there is an influx of English words 
into Japanese, and there are four main 
reasons for this.
The first is that English, of course, is 
the international language.
Most people learn it in school because 
it's the most useful language to learn 
if you don't already know it.
And this, of course, doesn't affect only Japanese.
French purists have been complaining about
words like "le weekend" and "le football"
for over half a century, and I don't think
it's really done much harm to French.
Now secondly, English has become the language
of technology, and technology, in particular
digital technology, has changed the life of
humans radically over the last few decades
and introduced a lot of new terminology 
into their lives.
And because most of this technology 
has been developed in America, 
the language in which the new 
terminology exists is largely English.
And the other reason -- again, these are 
all connected -- is that English,
being the international language, has 
high prestige in various ways.
It can be considered cool.
It can be considered cute.
And if you see a magical writing in Japanese,
it's likely to be based on the Roman alphabet
and possibly echoing English words because
English is something that's foreign  
to Japanese people but at the same time 
something they do actually know a bit of, 
so it's a kind of friendly bit of foreign.
And using English words can have various effects:
it can seem cute, it can seem clever,
it can seem cool.
And this is a common phenomenon.
When French was more of a high prestige language
and most English speakers learned it,
you got very much the same phenomenon.
People would throw in bits of French 
into conversation, 
authors would use bits of French in books
and it would be to look a bit clever,
sometimes to look funny.
High-prestige languages tend to get words
borrowed by other languages.
Now, none of this, as you see, is actually
unique to Japanese.
If you go around a non-English-speaking country,
you tend in almost all cases to see
some English words on signboards, on products 
in shops, all kinds of things like that.
English is around because, well, people have
learned it in school, they know a bit of English,
and it's the international language, so things
often tend to get named in English.
So why do people worry about this more in
Japanese than in other languages?
I think part of the reason is that katakana
English sticks out.
If you adopt English words into, say, 
French or German, 
they're written in the same script 
as the rest of the language.
And to foreigners in particular katakana-ized
English sounds weird.
They have to distort English in various ways
because they have to add lots of syllables.
So it all rather sticks out like a sore thumb,
more to foreigners by a long way
than to actual Japanese natives.
But a thing to bear in mind here is that on
the whole English loan-words don't replace
their Japanese equivalents, where there were
Japanese equivalents to start with.
They tend to run alongside them, perhaps have
a slightly different implication 
or just a different feel about them.
There are a few exceptions to this, like 
for example the word "raion", 
which tends to be the main word for
a lion in Japanese now.
Japanese has its own word for lion, 
which is "shishi", 
but these days it tends to sound a bit 
literary, a bit old-fashioned, 
and if we're going to talk about a lion,
we tend to say "raion".
That is a bit of an exception.
If we talk about an elephant, we say "zou".
If we talk about a tiger, we say "tora".
Most wild animals are known by their 
Japanese names 
even if the English name is also known 
in Japan.
There's a baseball team called the 
Hanshin Taigaasu, but this is
a typical case of using the foreign word  
because it sounds kind of cool.
Normally if you're just talking about a tiger,
you say "tora".
Now, if you want to do a little experiment
to see to what extent English really is moving
into Japanese and replacing the language,
well, just take a look at a Japanese book.
If you have some Japanese books around -- I
don't mean textbooks or readers for foreigners,
but if you just have some Japanese books
either on your bookshelf or on your
mobile device, open them up and take a look 
at a few pages from a few books
and see out of the entire page how many 
of the words are in katakana.
And you'll see that it's really a very
small proportion, 
maybe one or two on most pages,
often none at all.
And then see how many of those are in fact
names of people or places 
or made-up words that are written in katakana:
these are not loan-words.
The number of actual loan-words as a proportion
of an average page of text
or an average person's conversation is very small. 
Is it rising? Well, probably a bit, but it's not 
really making very significant inroads.
And the other thing to remember is that in
Japanese foreign words come in as nouns.
Almost always. There are one 
or two small exceptions
such as the word "saboru", which means
 "not attending school or work", 
and that's actually a foreign word based 
on French "sabotage",
and it has a hiragana -ru and is actually 
treated like a verb.
But this is really very much an exception.
You can only find a tiny handful of words
that do that in Japanese.
Nearly all the English words that come in,
just like the Chinese words that came in
in the past, come in as nouns, regardless of
what they were in the original language.
So, if you want to use them as verbs, 
you have to add "suru".
If you want to use them as adjectives,
they have to be adjectival nouns 
or you just have to use -no.
So, structurally, even if English words increased
exponentially, which isn't really very likely,
they wouldn't have any impact on the structure
of Japanese.
Even the Chinese words that actually now make
up about 60 per cent of the Japanese vocabulary
had just about no influence over the actual
structure of the language,
the way that sentences actually work.
And there's an interesting parallel there in that
when the Norman French
were ruling England they gave English a huge,
huge, huge amount of vocabulary
but again they had almost no impact on the 
structure of the language.
Now we might ask, is this going to go on,
this so-called English invasion?
And we can't really tell the answer to that
because it depends on
the continued prestige of English, which may or 
may not carry on into the future.
There doesn't seem to be any candidate for
an international language,
but on the other hand the cultural prestige of
of English may decline. We don't know.
But the thing is that Japanese assimilates
foreign words easily.
It doesn't integrate them into the structure,
but it does make them a part of the language
and it does Japanesify them.
English as a cultural phenomenon makes 
surprisingly few inroads into the Japanese mind.
Japanese people are notorious for not learning
English.
Japanese are worse at English than most other
language groups.
Most Japanese people, if you talk to them,
will have a surprisingly large English vocabulary
but a surprisingly small grasp of the actual
English language.
And I think there's a reason for this, and
that is that Japanese is closer than
any other non-English language to being 
culturally self-sufficient.
Most people, even if they're based in major
languages like French or German, 
kind of need English for cultural sustenance: 
for using the Internet, 
for participating in the popular culture 
of the modern world.
Now, the popular culture of the modern world is
far and away dominated by English, as we know.
But the second strongest popular-culture language
and nation is Japan and Japanese.
Japanese manga and anime are popular 
all over the world 
and there's nothing anywhere to rival them.
If you ask someone who has no interest in
Japan or Japanese
if they've heard of Japanese characters and 
phenomena like Mario, Sailor Moon, some of 
the Ghibli movies, Zelda, Pokemon, etcetera
etcetera, most of them will have heard of it.
How many characters from any other language
do most people know? How many
German ones?  How many French ones? 
And these are major languages.
How many Spanish ones? This is the biggest 
language in the world after English.
Japan is a popular-culture powerhouse to an
extent that is only exceeded by English
and not approached by any other language.
This makes them culturally self-sufficient
in a way that no other language group 
(with the possible exception of Chinese) 
really is.
So, when is Japanese going to turn into some
kind of hybrid English?
It's not going to happen.
It's not actually going to happen to most
of the other languages that
have an influx of English coming into them.
But Japanese is actually safer than the rest.
If you have any questions or comments, please
put them in the Comments below 
and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons,
my producer-angels, 
who make these videos possible, and all my 
producer-angels, all my patrons and 
my other supporters on Patreon and everywhere.
Thank you so much for making all of this possible.
And if you've ever been worrying about Japanese
somehow being taken over by English,
you can put your mind at rest.
The deeper you go into the language, and I
hope these videos are helping you to go deeper
and deeper, the more you see that Japanese
is its own reality, 
its own world of tradition and culture  
and imagination
And of course it assimilates modern phenomena.
It wouldn't survive if it wasn't able to 
assimilate modern phenomena 
and adapt its tradition and culture to the modern world.
Not only is that not a threat to Japanese,
it's a guarantee that it can continue.
Japanese is more successful, I think, at integrating
tradition and its own culture 
with new cultural phenomena than most countries.  
And that's a lot to do with the way Japanese 
handled the ideas of the modern world 
during the Meiji era.
But that is a subject for another day.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.