Hello, pretty peoples.  KawaJapa no Kyua Dorii desu.
I am Cure Dolly from KawaJapa. In this mini-lesson we are going to talk about the
expression "yoroshiku onegaishimasu". EvenEvenOdd-san notices that I use this
expression at the end of every lesson
and asks, "According to the Genki textbook,
this phrase means 'Nice to meet you' and
is used when a person introduces
themselves to someone for the first time.
However, you use it to mean something
else. What do you mean by it?" Now, this is
something I wish the textbooks would not
do. For a phrase book, it's okay—you just
want to know what sounds to mimic in
order to greet someone when you meet
them for the first time, but for a
textbook it is very confusing, because
"yoroshiku onegaishimasu" does not mean "Pleased to meet you" or anything like that.
It's used at the kind of time when
someone in English might say "Pleased to
meet you" and it's used at other times
too. But it does not mean "Pleased to meet you".
It means something like "Please be
good to me"
or "I beg your favor". "I beg your favor" is
old-fashioned English but is probably
closer to the real meaning of "yoroshiku
onegaishimasu". So we say this on various
occasions as well as when we first meet
someone. For example, at the new year we
say, "kotoshi mo yoroshiku onegaishimasu": "This year
again please be good to me, please give
me your favor". it does not come across as demanding because in saying "yoroshiku onegaishimasu"
you're placing the other
person on a higher level than yourself.
It is humble language and also it is assuming the
other person is a superior person who
CAN give you favor. That is why the
aite, the person you are talking to, may well say "kochira koso yoroshiku onegaishimasu",
which means "It is I who should be asking
YOUR favor", or more literally, "This side
especially asks favor". The grammar is a little difficult at beginner level, so I'm
not going to explain it here,
because if you are a beginner you really
don't need to learn it. But I will say
that it is a special form of grammar
called "kenjougo", which means grammar that humbles the
speaker. So you are lowering yourself in
order to raise a person to whom you're
talking. We are doing an article to
accompany this video at KawaJapa and
I will put that in the comments below, so
if you want to know the exact meaning of
this grammar, if you're a little more
advanced or if you're just curious,
please take a look at that article. If
you would like to learn more about how
Japanese really works as opposed to what the textbooks tell you about it, you may
want to read my book "Unlocking Japanese", which is available at Amazon in Kindle
and paperback editions. Thank you for
attending this mini-lesson.  Kore kara mo
yoroshiku onegaishimasu". Class dismissed.