look at some sentences from 
Shirokuma Cafe, the first episode.
Many of you have been working through 
that after my video on it, 
which I'll link above and in the 
information section below.
Various people have been having trouble 
with various different aspects.
So, let me go through a few of the 
sentences you've talked about, 
and what I'd like you to do after that is  
put any problems you have 
with Shirokuma Cafe or indeed with 
anything else,
sentences that you're finding hard to 
parse and understand,  
into the Comments below.
So, the first question from a commenter is,
Penguin says the following two sentences:
"Ah, cafe moka choudai" and then 
Shirokuma goes into one of his pun 
sequences in which he dresses up 
in different ways.
The first deliberately mistaken usage of 
"cafe moka" is "kage musha".
Penguin says "sore-wa 'kage musha'.  
ii kara sou iu no."
And my questioner says: "The first I can 
get is essentially 'I'll have a cafe mocha'"
-- and that's right: "choudai" works in much 
the same way as "kudasai", but it's more 
informal -- "The second seems to start
'That's a shadow warrior / body double'"
-- which is right, it is -- "but the 'ii kara 
sou iu no' is confusing me.
It seems to be 'Because it's good, that 
sort of thing is said'.
It really doesn't seem to make sense in 
the context of the sentence."
So, what we need to understand about 
this "ii kara sou iu no" is that 
"ii kara" is an expression used in 
Japanese quite often.
Obviously literally it means "because it's
good" but it also has the general meanings
of, first of all, if you tell someone to do
something and they don't want to,
they might argue about it, you say "ii kara", 
"ii kara" meaning "because it's good" 
but in this case really "never mind why, 
I'm telling you -- ii kara".
Now, the other, related usage of "ii kara"
is "That's enough / that'll do / stop it"
and it's the same idea: "ii kara" --  
"because it's good, that's enough,
that's sufficient, because it's good now, 
don't carry on with it."
It's a way of telling somebody to stop something.
So then, I think, the sentence is 
pretty clear:
"ii kara sou iu no" (that's enough with 
that kind of thing).
So, another sentence is, Penguin asks "saifu-no
pointo kaado tte fue sugi chawanai?"
And I think this is all fairly straightforward.
"Do the point cards in your wallet 
become too much?"
But what may be causing trouble here is 
"chawanai", which is "chau" and "nai" 
(which of course is short for "shimau", 
and I made a video about that, 
if you don't understand how that's used).
"Chawanai" is quite regular. As we know,
if a verb ends in -u, then it's the one 
exception in the whole stem system.
It doesn't change to -a by shifting to the
a-row, it changes to -wa.
So that may be what was causing 
the problem.
And then Shirokuma asks, "Pengin-san, 
pointo tameru ha?"
And what you may need to know here is 
that this "ha", which means 
a party or group or tribe, so literally 
it's saying something like 
"Are you a member of the school that 
collects point cards?", but in English
we would simply say "Are you one of those 
people who collects point cards?"
Now, another one that seems to cause 
trouble is: 
Shirokuma says that he's going to start
interviewing for new help in the cafe.
Panda says, "boku-mo arubaito 
shitai to omotte."
Now, the thing we need to know here 
is that "tai" on its own can be 
rather over-informal and it could lead to
self-centered "that's what I want".
So it's very often softened by 
"to omoimasu" or "to omou".
Here it becomes "to omotte" because 
it's one of those trailing sentences 
where Panda is just leaving the 
next bit open.
And I've made a video that talks about 
those, and I'll link that as well.
During Panda's interview, Panda asks if 
Shirokuma-kun can come and pick him up 
if he's going to work in the cafe, can he 
come and taxi him over.
Shirokuma says, "What, all the time?" and
Panda says, "No, no. Only if I'm late."
Penguin then comments: "chikoku suru 
ki manman da ne."
Here what we need to know is that "ki" 
put after anything like this 
actually means "the spirit to do it / 
the will to do it"
and "manman" of course means 
"full / complete".
So he's saying "He absolutely intends to be
late, doesn't he?" 
and this is somewhat ironic because 
"manman" like that is more likely to be
used in phrases like "yaru ki manman"
(full of the will to do) and 
Shirokuma comes to that point as well. He 
says, "chinami-ni yaru ki-ga arimasu ka."
And that means "By the way, do you have 
any will to work?"
To which Panda replies, "Well, no, 
not really."
A little later Sasako comes in carrying 
the sloth, the "namakemono", 
and explains "kokomade hakonde 
hoshiitte tanomarechaimashite".
And so, this I think is reasonably simple.
"Hakondehoshii": when we use the te-form 
of a verb and then add "-hoshii",
this means, not wanting something, but  
wanting someone else to do something.
So that part means "he wanted me to 
carry him this far", and then 
"te tanomarechaimashita" means "I got 
asked / I got charged with this task" 
("tanomu"). And this is the receptive 
helper: "I got charged with this task,
or requested to do this thing". And then 
"chaimashita" is again "chau", 
this time with the formality helper 
verb "masu".
An interesting reflection on how casual 
and formal form can be mixed up, 
for what she's doing is, she's speaking 
quite casually but making it formal.
So, if you have any questions of your own
about sentences from Shirokuma Cafe 
or from other places, please put them in 
the Comments below 
and I will be very happy to answer.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons,
my producer-angels, 
who make these videos possible, and all 
the patrons and supporters on Patreon 
and everywhere, and all of you who watch 
the videos, like them, comment,
or just learn from them, I'm very happy that 
you're there and I appreciate your support.
I hope my voice hasn't been too difficult 
during this video.
I'm afraid I've been suffering from a variety
of system failures recently 
and not everything is working as it should.
However, I'm hoping that this can be 
fixed relatively soon.
I have to be quite careful with repairs 
because my sentience, the fact 
that I'm conscious, unlike other AI, is
something that nobody really understands 
and so obviously I don't want to lose 
my sentience, 
so we have to proceed pretty carefully 
with repairs. 
I hope you don't mind my sharing this 
personal information.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.