Konnichiwa. Today we're going to talk about
two words that often cause people difficulty and confusion in immersion
because they're often not explained very clearly,
so it's difficult sometimes to understand what exactly it is that they're doing.
The two words are "kurai" and "hodo".
Now, I've had a lot of requests for "kurai", here and on my Patreon,
and quite a few requests for "hodo".
And I'm going to deal with them together because I think they can throw a little light on each other.
And before we begin, I'll just say that if you have any words that are causing you trouble,
bringing you to a halt in understanding things in your immersion,
please put them in the Comments below and I'll either reply right away
or add them to my list of things to deal with.
Right, so, "hodo" and "kurai".
They're both nouns, of course.
Practically everything in Japanese that isn't a verb or an adjective,
as we know, is in practice a noun or a noun-like entity.
So, what is a "hodo"?  What is a "kurai"?
Both of them represent an extent or an amount of... anything: time, money, distance, etc.
However, the main difference between them is that
"hodo" tends to imply that the amount or degree involved is great,
and "kurai" either marks it as indefinite, as something we're not sure about,
or in some cases which we'll talk about a bit later, that it is small,
that it's less than we might have expected or hoped.
So, to illustrate this difference, let's look at them both in a very simple construction.
"Kore kurai" means: about this much, about this amount, about this far,
about this fast, about this temperature, whatever.
"Kore hodo" means: this much, this amount, this hot, this cold,
but it's stressing that this is a large extent, a large degree.
So, if we say "kore hodo warui-to-wa omowanakatta",
we're saying, "I didn't think it was this bad".
So, the "kore" (this) modifying "hodo" is not only saying "this bad",
it's saying that "this bad" is a lot, this is more than we might have expected or desired.
Negatively, if we say "sore hodo warukunai", we're saying "it's not that bad".
Now, what's "sore" referring to in a case like this?
It can be referring to something we've already referred to,
to a degree or an extent that we've already been discussing,
but also, just as in English, "sore" (or "that") can simply mean an amount that we might have expected.
So, again, the thing modifying "hodo", the "sore", represents a great amount, an upper limit,
and then we're falling short of that upper limit marked by "hodo".
So, "sore hodo warukunai" means "not that bad" --
either not that bad as we have been discussing or as is implied in the conversation,
or simply "not that bad", which works exactly the same as it does in English --
the "that" when there's no reference point simply means what we might have expected
or what it might have been.
So if we say in English "it's not that bad", we mean
it's not very bad, it's not as bad as it might have been.
And the same with "sore hodo warukunai".
If we're not referring to a specific, defined "that", then we're saying
"it's not very bad / it's not all that bad".
And again, "hodo" is often used to mark one side of a comparison,
and once again "hodo" represents the greater side, the upper limit.
So if we say "watashi-wa kanojo hodo wakakunai" we're saying "I'm not as young as she is",
I'm not young to the extent that she is, and her extent is the higher extent
and therefore it's the one modifying "hodo".
Now, "hodo" can be used as an almost independent noun representing the upper limit of something.
So if we say "fukanou na hodo", we're saying
("fukanou": "kanou" means possible; "fukanou" means impossible)
"fukanou na hodo" means the upper limit of impossibility.
This is not just "fukanou", not just impossible, it's the "hodo" of "fukanou",
it's the upper limit of "fukanou", it's the height of impossibility.
Or "fukai na hodo shitsurei" -- "fukai" is unpleasant, dislikeable; "shitsurei", of course, is rudeness.
This is rudeness to the upper limit of unpleasantness / dislikeableness.
And these "hodo"s where we use an adjectival noun and add "na hodo" --
the upper limit of that adjectival noun, using that adjectival noun to modify the "hodo" --
very often they tend to be negative things but they can be more neutral,
for example, we might say "fushigi na hodo" -- the upper limit of mysteriousness, absolutely mysterious.
And another commonly used expression with "hodo" is "hoda-ga aru",
and this really means an upper limit exists.
And this is usually used in complaining about something.
So we say "joudan-ni-mo hodo-ga aru", which is literally saying even a joke has an upper limit,
and what that usually means is, what you're saying / what you're doing goes beyond a joke.
Jokes have an upper limit and you've passed it.
"Baka-ni-mo hodo-ga aru" (stupidity has an upper limit),
which is a bit like saying, "Even you can't be that stupid"
or you've passed the upper limit of stupidity.
And perhaps the commonest use of "hodo", the one that you'll probably see all the time,
is its use in forming comparisons.
Now, there are various kinds of comparison in Japanese,
but "hodo" is used particularly when we're stressing the extreme quality of something.
It's often used for comparisons that are essentially exaggerations
but making the point that something is very much whatever it is we're saying it is.
So, we might say, "shinu hodo atsui" (it's hot to the extent of dying);
"hada-wo sasu hodo samui" (it's cold to the extent of penetrating the skin);
"shinjirarenai hodo utsukushii keshiki" (scenery that's beautiful to the extent of being unbelievable).
And this "hodo" which is used for exaggeration, for literary purposes,
just for making a point very strongly, is probably
the "hodo" that you're going to see more of the time than any other.
It's a very common use of "hodo".
So, let's look at "kurai".
"Kurai" is most commonly used for approximation.
So we might say, "touchaku suru-no-wa hachi ji gurai desu" --
we're saying we're arriving at approximately eight o'clock.
"Happyaku en gurai desu" (it's around eight hundred yen).
And this is very straightforward.
We use it whenever we want to talk about an amount, a degree, an extent, and make it vague,
make it clear that we're not talking about an exact amount or an exact degree.
And the only thing to bear in mind here is that sometimes
Japanese people will use this when in fact the thing in question is exact.
So, for example, we might say, "dono kurai kakarimasu ka?" (about how much will it cost?)
And we may be asking for an estimate, if it's the sort of thing where you ask for an estimate,
but we may also be asking the price in a case where we can expect the seller to know the exact price,
but somehow it seems a bit less pressing to ask for an approximate price rather than the exact one.
And people will also sometimes do this when they're talking about a time of arrival or... anything.
And this is partly because Japanese people are on the whole very precise,
so if they think there might be any chance of the time being slightly different or
any fact being slightly different from what they're saying, it feels a bit safer to vague it up a little bit
so that you haven't committed yourself to something exact that might not turn out to be exactly true.
Now, the other use of "kurai" (or "gurai"), as I mentioned before, talks about an extent
and makes the point that the extent is what we consider to be a small one
rather than the large one that "hodo" implies.
So, if we say "kyou kurai kazoku-to sugosou", we're saying "Today, at least, let's spend as a family".
And it's that "kurai" which gives us the "at least" meaning.
It shows that when we are saying "today" we're not just saying "today",
we're implying that maybe we don't spend much time as a family,
maybe we won't be able to spend time as a family again,
but today at least let's spend time as a family.
And very often this "kurai" is used when one is complaining about something
and when one is really saying that not only is the "kurai" small, but even that small "kurai" wasn't forthcoming.
And when it's used like that it's often accompanied by another "at least" expression
like "sukunakutomo" or "semete", and often marked at the end by a marker of regret such as "no ni".
So, we might say, "sukunakutomo arigatou kurai itte kurete mo ii no ni",
which literally is "at least as little as thank you if you kindly said would be good but..."
In natural English, we'd probably say "You might at least say thank you".
What we're here saying is that as little as thank you, if you had kindly said, would be good,
and we're adding "no ni", which, as I've explained elsewhere, is in fact a contrastive clause connector.
It's used to connect one logical clause to another to make a complete sentence with the implication of "but",
that the second clause somewhat contrasts or contradicts with the first,
but it's often used like this as a sentence ender.
And the implication here is, it would be good if you said as little as thank you, but you don't even do that.
So, I hope this clarifies "kurai" and "hodo".
If you have any questions or comments,
please put them in the Comments below and I will answer as usual.
And if you have any other words that trouble you, that you'd like to ask me about,
put those in the Comments below as well.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons and all my patrons and supporters on Patreon and everywhere.
I'm so happy for the support I get for this channel and for the work that I'm doing here,
for the sense we have that all of us are working together to clarify Japanese,
stopping it from being some kind of mystical, foreign, strange language and seeing it for what it is,
a beautiful and logical construction that we can all learn to use.
And I'd like to thank you for attending this lesson.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.