Konnichiwa. Today we're going to talk 
about two words: "sae" and "sura".
Now, I'm going to concentrate mainly on "sae"  
because we'll find that "sura" is really 
a variant of "sae" that can be used under 
certain circumstances.
What is this word?  It's a particle that 
marks something that is either 
high or low compared to expectations or 
what might be considered normative and
therefore is slightly out of the ordinary, a little 
bit surprising, sometimes very surprising.
It can be attached to any noun, pronoun, or 
noun-like entity and also to the te-form of verbs.
And the noun-like entity can have "de", which 
is the te-form of the copula, after it 
and that emphasizes it more: 
"nani-nani-de-sae". And it can
also have -mo after it: "-de-sae-mo" 
-- which emphasizes it even more.  
There's no actual difference in meaning for 
these variants. They're just stages of emphasis.
All right, so let's get past the abstract stuff 
and see how it really works in practice.
"Sensei-de-sae sono mondai-wa tokenakatta",  
which in English we would translate as "Even 
the teacher could not solve the problem". 
So that corresponds pretty much directly   
to English "even", which is one of the 
dictionary definitions it gets, but we'll see 
that it does various other things too.
So we should notice here that the -sae or 
-de-sae knocks out other particles.
Really we're saying "Sensei-wa sono 
mondai-wa [zero-ga] tokenakatta".
So we could say that there's a zero-wa 
in here.
This means that it's often used for a  
strong expression. So we might say 
"kodomo-de-sae-mo sonna koto-wa dekiru" 
(even a child can do such a thing)  
and that might be directed at someone who
can't do it: "Even a child can do that!"
Now, "sura", interestingly, is both more literary,  
more used in written constructions,
but also, especially in spoken 
constructions,  more emphatic.
So if we said "Saru-de-sura sonna 
koto-wa dekiru"
(even a monkey can do such a thing), and 
we're using -sura to make it even stronger:
"You can't do a thing like that? Even a 
monkey can do a thing like that!" 
Now, these examples really work with 
a lower baseline. 
They're saying the basic, most simple, 
fundamental, minimal expectation  
would be that at least the teacher could  
solve the problem, if nobody else could,
or we're saying even a monkey, even a  
child, someone you'd barely expect to 
be able to do it, could do it. But it can 
work both ways round.
So, for example, "ano robotto-wa utau 
koto-sae dekimasu" (that robot can even sing). 
So now we're looking at an upper baseline. 
And it's still a surprising thing.
You wouldn't expect a robot to be able to
sing. Tra-la-la!  But some of us can.  
And we notice here that -sae is marking 
not the robot but "utau koto"  
(the thing of singing). That's the thing  
that's unexpected. 
That's the thing that exceeds the baseline.
If we marked "robotto" with -sae, "ano 
robotto-sae utau koto-ga dekimasu"
and then we're saying "Even that robot can 
sing", which might have the implication  
"You can't sing, but even that robot 
can sing".
So notice that it's important to consider 
which element the -sae is marking.
Now, in any of these cases -sura could 
be used to replace -sae,
but -sae is often used in the conditional 
form,
and it's important to understand that here 
-sura cannot be exchanged for -sae.
So with conditional sentences it has to 
be -sae. 
And with conditional sentences the 
meaning changes slightly.
It's still basically the same meaning, but 
it tends to mean a minimum baseline.
So, let's look at some typical sentences 
here: 
"kimi-sae ireba hoka-ni-wa nani-mo 
iranai."  
And this would be translated into 
English as 
"As long as I have you, I don't need 
anything else".
And this indicates the way that -sae can 
form expression strategies that are 
different from ones used in English, 
because what is actually being said here
is "If only you exist, if (baseline minimum) 
you exist, nothing else is needed".
So, for another expression strategy that 
probably differs rather from English: 
"sensou-sae nakattara konna-ni bukka-ga  
agaru no-de-wa nakatta darou"
(Had it not been for the war,  the prices  
wouldn't have risen like that). 
But what we're actually saying in Japanese 
is "Baseline minimum,  
if the war hadn't happened, the prices 
wouldn't have risen like this".
The -sae, what the -sae is doing, is saying
that the only factor, just as 
"kimi-sae ireba...", (the only factor is having 
you, then everything else is okay for me),  
here, the only factor is that the war 
happened. If the war hadn't 
happened, nothing else would have 
made the prices rise.
And again, both of these are unexpected 
in the sense that we would expect 
a number of factors to be active. We 
would expect people to need 
a number of things, not just one person, 
but also food and housing and all kinds 
of other things. They probably actually
do, so it's a bit of an exaggeration. 
Similarly, one would expect the rise in 
prices to have a variety of causes,
but what we're saying here is it only had 
one cause, and that's the war.
So we take another expression: "hon-sae 
yonde ireba gohan-wo taberu koto-mo wasurechau."
"I even forget my meals in reading" 
might be an English way of putting it,  
but what it's actually saying is "If only 
I'm reading (that one factor is present)  
I even forget my meals". And another
example which really falls even
further from any English equivalent is 
"kare-wa hima-sae areba sakanatsuri da"  
(Whenever he has a spare moment / 
whenever he has time, he goes fishing). 
But what this is actually saying is "If only 
free time exists, then he goes fishing".
And so the expression strategy is very 
different from English, 
but what we're saying here is, 
the only thing that has to happen is for 
spare time to exist and he's off fishing. 
And to take one more non-conditional 
example:
"Usagi-de-sae konna-ni hayaku
sugata-wo kesenakatta"  
which in English would be "Rabbits could 
not have disappeared more quickly".  
So, rabbits marked as a limit of  
expectation, and this is like an upper 
limit of expectation, in the way that 
monkeys being able to do something 
was a lower limit of expectation. 
"..konna-ni hayaku sugata-wo kesenakatta"
"Sugata-wo kesu" means literally "cause 
one's form or appearance to vanish" 
and it's a common expression for 
disappearing, making oneself unfindable.   
So the rabbit's marked as an upper limit, 
an example of something that can   
disappear very fast: even they couldn't 
disappear their appearance 
as quickly as those people did. 
If you have any questions or comments, 
please put them in the Comments below 
and I will answer as usual. 
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons, 
my producer-angels, who make these   
videos possible, and all my patrons and 
supporters on Patreon and everywhere, 
and all of you who watch my videos 
and like them and comment,
and especially you for attending this 
lesson.
Thank you for supporting this channel 
and for helping us to look into 
both the big structures of Japanese 
and the little words like this that,
even though they are little, are often hard
to understand when all you get is the word
and then a number of English equivalents, 
and you're left to work out for yourself 
what's going on, which isn't really very 
easy a lot of the time.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.