Konnichiwa, and welcome to Reiwa san'nen.
Under two years ago the Reiwa era began 
with an upsurge of hope for a wonderful new era.
And then came Reiwa Two, which quickly turned out
to be something of a disastrous year.
It was going to be the year of the Tokyo Olympics,
and we all know what happened to that.
But I still believe that Reiwa is going to be a wonderful new era
and perhaps Reiwa san'nen will start to show us that.
Today we're going to talk about two words 
that I've been asked about recently.
The first is "toori" in its attachment to other words.
"Toori" of course, on its own, is the i-stem of "tooru" (pass through).
And as a noun, it means a road or a way, or the act of passing through.
It then gets used in expressions like "sono toori"
and what this means literally is "that road, or
that way of travelling, that way of passing through".
And what this actually means is "that's right / you're absolutely right".
How does it come to mean that?
Well, it's really saying that the way you're thinking,
the road, the track, the passage along which
you're thinking, is the correct one: "sono toori".
A little bit similar in English to saying "you're on the right track",
except that "you're on the right track" in English
would imply that you're not quite there yet,
but "sono toori" means you're thinking along exactly the right lines,
you're there, you've got it, you're right.
Another expression that uses "toori" is "goran-no toori".
Now, "goran" when it's written in kanji is written like this.
So you can see the "go" is honorific;
the "ran" is actually another way of writing the word "miru".
Now, I did a video a little while ago on the word "miru" (see or look or watch)
and five different kanji with which it can be written.
And I said at the time there are in fact more.
I didn't introduce them because they're not all that common,
and this one isn't a common way of writing "miru" either.
But with its on-reading "ran" it is used, and
"goran" is an honorific way of saying "the
act of looking or seeing".
So "goran-no toori", rather like "sono toori", means
"as you can see / along the lines of your
seeing is correct",
just as along the lines of your saying or thinking is correct.
"Goran-no toori" (as you can see).
Another "toori" expression is "omoidoori".
Now, here of course we're using the i-stem of "omou",
which gets translated as "think" in English
but actually means more than that, it means "feel".
But "omoi" often also means one's will, one's desire,
and I mentioned this in a previous video
when I was explaining how "omoi-no mama" means
"in the unchanged condition of one's will
or desire".
And I'll put a link for that in case you're interested in following it up.
"Omoidoori" means "in the road, the track, the course of one's will or desire",
so it means having things go or wanting things to go in accordance
with one's will / in accordance with one's
wishes.
And that can be anything from selfish desire to,
when you're in the water perhaps, wanting
your body to move in the way that you want it to move,
which it doesn't always do when you're in the water.
Now, the other word that I've been asked about is "sekkaku".
Now, "sekkaku" has a whole range of definitions
if you look in the dictionary.
It's defined as "with trouble, great pains; rare, valuable, precious,
long-awaited; kind, generous; specially, expressly",
which is rather a lot of things for one word to mean.
But essentially they all come down to the same thing,
which is the notion that something is valuable
and in some sense irreplaceable.
Now, probably the most common implication is
that great trouble has been spent on it.
So if we say "sekkaku-no doryoku-ga mizu-no awa da",
we're saying "My 'sekkaku' efforts have come to nothing",
literally "...are foam on the water / bubbles on the water".
So we can see that obviously as the most common usage,
the usage people probably think of most often,
which is "with great effort / with great trouble /
having taken the effort (to do something)".
We might say "sekkaku Toukyo-ni kita, we ought to go to Sanrio Puroland",
because if you've taken the trouble to go all the way to Tokyo,
it's a bit of a waste of time if you don't get to Sanrio Puroland
and see Hello Kitty and My Melody and Pom Pom Purin
and all the wonderful people that live there, the Little Twin Stars.
If you ever "sekkaku" get to Tokyo, you really must go there.
But back to the subject in hand.
However, the point about "sekkaku" is not just
the trouble that might have been taken, it
is the fact
that something is rare and precious and difficult to replace.
Going to Tokyo is difficult to replace because once you've left
you've got to take all the trouble to go back there again.
But you might also say "sekkaku-no kyuujitsu-mo ame-de tsubureta"
(The "sekkaku" day of rest / holiday was ruined by rain).
And that's "sekkaku" because it's relatively rare.
You don't get that many days off.
So just like going all the way to Tokyo or
taking all those efforts to do something,
it's "sekkaku", it's precious, it's rare, it's hard to replace.
"Ano koukoku-ga sekkaku-no fuukei-wo sokonau"
(those advertisements / those billboards ruin the "sekkaku" scenery).
And again, "sekkaku" in this case doesn't mean hard work,
it doesn't mean rarity in the sense of not coming very often,
it just means that that scenery is something beautiful and unique
and irreplaceable and it's being ruined by the billboards.
And there isn't really a word to replace "sekkaku" in English.
It's a word that I would say is in some ways influenced by Japanese culture.
The idea of the preciousness of the sakura because
it only comes for a short time and it's quickly
blown away by the winds or beaten down by the rain.
The sadness, the fleetingness, the "hakanai" nature of life
and the necessity to grasp what is rare and precious
as it passes, while we can.
If you have any questions or comments,
please put them in the Comments below
and I will answer as usual.
I'd like to thank my Gold Kokeshi patrons, my producer-angels,
and all my patrons and supporters on Patreon and everywhere,
who make these videos possible.
And I'd like to thank you for attending this lesson.
As I said in the beginning, I think this is going to be a wonderful era.
Whether it begins this year or not, I don't know,
but for us, for you, it can begin this year.
Perhaps it began last year, despite everything.
You're moving forward in Japanese.
The doors are opening into a wonderful new world
of understanding and imagination.
And I want to thank you for coming on this journey with me.
Let's face this beautiful future together.
Kore kara mo yoroshiku onegai shimasu.
Class dismissed.